Zoom’s Security Woes Were No Secret to Business Partners Like Dropbox
By Natasha Singer and Nicole PerlrothOne year ago, two Australian hackers found themselves on an eight-hour flight to Singapore to attend a live hacking competition sponsored by Dropbox. At 30,000 feet, with nothing but a slow internet connection, they decided to get a head start by hacking Zoom, a videoconferencing service that they knew was used by many Dropbox employees.The hackers soon uncovered a major security vulnerability in Zoom’s software that could have allowed attackers to covertly control certain users’ Mac computers. It was precisely the type of bug that security engineers at Dropbox had come to dread from Zoom, according to three former Dropbox engineers.Now Zoom’s videoconferencing service has become the preferred communications platform for hundreds of millions of people sheltering at home, and reports of its privacy and security troubles have proliferated.Zoom’s defenders, including big-name Silicon Valley venture capitalists, say the onslaught of criticism is unfair. They argue that Zoom, originally designed for businesses, could not have anticipated a pandemic that would send legions of consumers flocking to its service in the span of a few weeks and using it for purposes — like elementary school classes and family celebrations — for which it was never intended.“I don’t think a lot of these things were predictable,” said Alex Stamos, a former chief security officer at Facebook who recently signed on as a security adviser to Zoom. “It’s like everyone decided to drive their cars on water.”The former Dropbox engineers, however, say Zoom’s current woes can be traced back two years or more, and they argue that the company’s failure to overhaul its security practices back then put its business clients at risk.Dropbox grew so concerned that vulnerabilities in the videoconferencing system might compromise its own corporate security that the file-hosting giant took on the unusual step of policing Zoom’s security practices itself, according to the former engineers, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to publicly discuss their work.As part of a novel security assessment program for its vendors and partners, Dropbox in 2018 began privately offering rewards to top hackers to find holes in Zoom’s software code and that of a few other companies. The former Dropbox engineers said they were stunned by the volume and severity of the security flaws that hackers discovered in Zoom’s code — and troubled by Zoom’s slowness in fixing them.After Dropbox presented the hackers’ findings from the Singapore event to Zoom Video Communications, the California company behind the videoconferencing service, it took more than three months for Zoom to fix the bug, the former engineers said. Zoom patched the vulnerability only after another hacker publicized a different security flaw with the same root cause.Zoom’s sudden popularity — nearly 600,000 people downloaded the app on a single day last month — has opened it to increased scrutiny by researchers and journalists and forced the company to grapple with a rash of security incidents.Three weeks ago, the F.B.I. warned that it had received multiple reports of trolls hijacking public school classes on Zoom to display pornography and make threats — malicious attacks known as “Zoombombing.”Last week, Vice’s Motherboard blog reported that security bug brokers were selling access — for $500,000 — to critical Zoom security flaws that could allow remote access into users’ computers. Separately, hackers put up more than half a million Zoom users’ passwords and user names for sale on the so-called dark web.On April 1, Eric S. Yuan, Zoom’s chief executive, said the company would devote all of its engineering resources for the next 90 days to shoring up security and privacy. Last week, the company announced a revamped reward program for hackers who find security flaws in its code. Mr. Stamos said Zoom was also working on design changes to reduce the potential risks of security flaws and abuses like Zoombombing.In a statement, Zoom said it appreciated “the researchers and industry partners who have helped — and continue to help — us identify issues as we continuously seek to strengthen our platform.” It added that the company was “proactively working to better identify, address and fix issues.”In a statement, Dropbox said it was “grateful to Zoom for being the first to participate” in its vendor bug bounty program. It added that Dropbox itself used the videoconferencing service for internal meetings and that Zoom had become “a critical tool in keeping our teams connected.”Before Zoom’s initial public offering in 2019, Dropbox made a $5 million investment in the company. Separately, Bryan Schreier, a Dropbox director, is a partner at Sequoia Capital, which made a $100 million investment in Zoom before the initial offering.Even critics acknowledge that Zoom remains the most user-friendly videoconferencing service on the market and has become a crucial communications tool during the pandemic. Security researchers also praised Zoom for improving its response times — quickly patching recent bugs and removing features that presented privacy risks to consumers.Zoom is hardly the first tech company whose sudden surge in popularity exposed its problems. Microsoft, Twitter, Google, Facebook and Uber have all settled federal charges related to consumer security or privacy.What is different about Zoom is the unusual role that another tech company — Dropbox — played in pushing the videoconferencing service to address its security weaknesses. Details on Dropbox’s role have not been publicly reported before.Many companies, including Zoom, have “bug bounty programs” in which they pay hackers to turn over flaws in the company’s own software code. But Dropbox, which has integrated its file-sharing services with Zoom, did something novel.Starting in 2018, Dropbox privately offered to pay top hackers it regularly worked with to find problems with Zoom’s software. It even had its own security engineers confirm the bugs and look for related problems before passing them on to Zoom, according to the former Dropbox engineers.Hackers have reported several dozen problems with Zoom to Dropbox, the former employees said. These included moderate problems, like the ability for attackers to take over users’ actions on the Zoom web app, and more serious security flaws like the ability for attackers to run malicious code on computers using Zoom software. Dropbox also put in its own controls to ensure that its integration with Zoom did not present risks to Dropbox users.Zoom’s reputation for security weaknesses began to spread within Dropbox, the former engineers said.As part of an annual companywide hacking competition in 2018, Dropbox engineers created a knockoff of Zoom — they called it “Vroom” — and challenged employees to hack it. The Dropbox employees successfully obtained Vroom meeting codes, which would have allowed them to crash hypothetical Vroom meetings. The idea of the exercise, former Dropbox employees said, was to teach Dropbox engineers to avoid making some of the security mistakes that Zoom had made.Some former employees said Dropbox had also prompted Zoom to introduce additional security measures, including a virtual waiting room feature that now allows meeting organizers to vet participants before letting them into a videoconference.“I have no doubt that Zoom was better able to address the current ‘zoombombing’ craze thanks to Dropbox’s early” involvement, Chris Evans, a former head of security at Dropbox, wrote in an email to a reporter.Dropbox employees weren’t the only ones finding problems. In late 2018, David Wells, a senior research engineer at Tenable, a security vulnerability assessment company, uncovered a serious flaw in Zoom that would have allowed an attacker to remotely disrupt a meeting — without even being on the call. Among other things, Mr. Wells reported that an attacker could take over a Zoom user’s screen controls, enter keystrokes and covertly install malware on their computer.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Wells also found the vulnerability allowed him to post messages in Zoom chats under other people’s names and kick people off meetings. Mr. Wells, who reported his findings directly to Zoom, said Zoom had quickly patched the flaws.In early 2019, Dropbox sponsored HackerOne Singapore, the live hacking competition. To put pressure on Zoom to take security more seriously, former Dropbox engineers said, Dropbox included the videoconferencing service among companies for which it offered bug bounties at the event.Even before the event began, one hacker reported a major vulnerability to Dropbox that could have allowed attackers to pose as Zoom over Wi-Fi and secretly observe users’ video calls, the former Dropbox engineers said.Soon after, the two Australian hackers, an engineer and an executive at Assetnote, a security company, uncovered the flaw that would have allowed an attacker to covertly take complete control of certain computers running Apple’s macOS, according to a blog post published by the hackers.The discovery was particularly jarring because attackers could have used the Zoom vulnerability to gain access to the deepest levels of a user’s computer.But Zoom did not quickly address the flaw. Instead, the company waited more than three months until a third researcher independently uncovered and publicized a separate, less serious issue, with the same underlying cause.Mr. Yuan, Zoom’s chief executive, subsequently wrote a blog post in July apologizing for the delay.