A Little E-Commerce Has Big Ripples
Online shopping has changed our behavior, reordered the nature of work and challenged our cities.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.Online shopping is not as big a deal as you think, and it’s a much bigger deal than you think.In the “meh” camp: While for some it can feel like e-commerce is the only commerce, Americans still buy about 85 percent of our stuff in person. And our internet shopping over recent years has been a contributing factor to a record number of store closings every year and other retail pain — but it hasn’t been the cause.What’s remarkable, though, is the profound effect from the relatively small amount of digital shopping. Online shopping has changed our behavior, reordered the nature of work and challenged the functioning of our neighborhoods and cities.If that has been the impact when online shopping is 15 percent of what we buy, what happens if the pandemic permanently kicks that share to one quarter or more?We should cheer the convenience of online shopping, and it’s the safest option for many people in the pandemic. It has also created new opportunities for businesses to reach new customers.That doesn’t mean we should like everything about the new order.But first we need to recognize what online shopping has changed — and what it hasn’t.First, Amazon didn’t push chains like J.C. Penney and J. Crew into a canyon. There are complex economic forces at work, and a simple reality: America has too many store locations, and many retailers have acted dumb or greedy.Second, in-person stores aren’t going away. If anything, the last few years showed how much they matter. Amazon bought a grocery store chain, for goodness sake, and is building more food shops and convenience stores.What has changed from online shopping are our brains and our world.I am happy for shampoo to appear on command at my door. But we haven’t assessed what we lose when shopping shifts from wandering the mall with other humans to sitting alone at home with robots.And as I’ve written before, in response to a small minority of our shopping shifting online, delivery orders have forced neighborhoods and cities to grapple with far more truck traffic and chaos.Online shopping is also creating jobs that may be better than conventional retail store work in some ways, but pose other challenges. Compared with retail store jobs, the work of the online shopping economy tends to be more automated, in fewer parts of the country and employs more men than women.It’s not Amazon’s fault that its package sorting operation in Baltimore stands on the grounds of a former auto factory that once employed 8,000 people who made up to $100,000 a year in today’s dollars, while Amazon has half as many workers there making less than half as much. This is a broader economic reordering.But is that it? Should we, as Amazon’s top spokesman suggested in The New York Times Opinion section in February, stop comparing a warehouse employee making $30,000 a year plus benefits to an autoworker making twice as much decades ago because these jobs might be the worker’s best option?We shouldn’t preserve old ways of life because of nostalgia. But it doesn’t mean we should just shrug and turn the page, either.Get this newsletter in your inbox every weekday; please sign up here.When I asked you recently to send in your gadget fix-it questions, I definitely did not expect Judy from Los Angeles to ask about reviving her portable Sony CD player — a.k.a., the Walkman or Discman that was first made in the 1980s.Dan Koeppel from the Wirecutter, a product recommendation site owned by The Times, tackled this retro tech query:I admire your spirit. I assume this is a labor of love, and that’s always a good thing — even though this answer is going to emphasize the “labor” part.Now, forensics. I’m going to take a guess and hope it makes me look like a genius: Some old music players, including those from Sony, had a button marked “hold.” When this switch is activated, the unit won’t turn on. Other models had switches for the battery. Look on the exterior and inside the battery compartment and flip any switches you find.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Did that work? If not, dig deeper. Look for any corrosion on the battery terminals and clean them. Wear protective gear for your hands and eyes. Battery acid is nasty stuff.No go? I’m afraid there aren’t many self-help options left. As an Angeleno, I would have recommended my go-to electronics repair guy, but he retired last year. However, Los Angeles still has a dwindling number of old-school repair outlets.If you’re up for an adventure, you might find somebody able to revive your classic device so you can (I hope) play that vintage Christina Aguilera CD.How to balance work and keeping employees safe: One central business question of the pandemic is how much employers should do to protect workers. My colleague Karen Weise looked at one Amazon warehouse in Pennsylvania that missed early opportunities to safeguard employees, including not fully implementing some health measures for almost two months.TikTok has a new boss: The app for short videos is one of the few apps from a Chinese company that has caught on everywhere. It just hired a high-profile new chief executive from Disney, my colleagues Brooks Barnes and Jack Nicas wrote. His challenge will be to keep TikTok relevant, make it financially viable, calm American lawmakers worried about its Chinese ownership and avoid the mistakes of internet hangouts that came before. Good luck, new guy!Red state memes versus blue state memes: Nick Corasaniti on The Times’s politics team writes about the 33-year-old twins behind the popular Facebook page Occupy Democrats. The social media mavens of the left are emerging as a counterweight to the internet mastery of the right.Just watch this solo home quarantine recreation of the closing scene of “Dirty Dancing,” with a floor lamp standing in for Jennifer Grey. (My colleague Sapna Maheshwari spotted this in the “So Many Thoughts” newsletter.)We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.