Enlisted Late, Online Lenders Still Must Wait to Help Speed Up Stimulus
By David McCabe and Nathaniel PopperWASHINGTON — When the federal government opened its $349 billion small-business lending program last Friday, start-ups that specialize in giving such loans were eager to accept applications and send money to the restaurants, gyms and hair salons hit hard by the coronavirus shutdown.Yet these online lenders were locked out of the program for the first six days, even as small businesses complained about the difficulties in getting loans through traditional banks.Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin had said on Fox News on March 29 that online lenders could be a part of what is known as the Paycheck Protection Program in order to give small businesses more, and potentially faster, options to get the loans.But it was only on Wednesday night that the Treasury Department offered online lenders a way to apply to take part in the program. The start-ups said they had received no guidance on how long it would be before they could begin lending.The difficulties facing online lenders are another example of the dysfunction and disorganization that have slowed down the flow of loans to small businesses, even as President Trump has insisted that the program is going well, with only a few small glitches.Financial technology companies like PayPal and Square, and smaller companies that focus on small-business lending, like Kabbage and OnDeck, have specialized in giving loans to the businesses that are the focus of the government program — those with fewer than 500 employees — and doing it more quickly than banks. Many of the lenders have expressed frustration that they have been shut out when they feel they could be the most useful.“Every five minutes I’ve been refreshing the Treasury page like a maniac,” said Sam Taussig, the head of global policy at Kabbage, one of the largest online lenders for small businesses. “The businesses that we serve on Main Street, they only have about 10 to 12 days of cash on hand, and we are well past that in many places.”The Small Business Administration and the Treasury Department, which are overseeing the loans program, didn’t respond to requests for comment about the online lenders. S.B.A. officials have said they are working to iron out any issues slowing the flow of money to business owners.The lenders want to help distribute the $349 billion in loans the government is giving to small businesses to help them make payroll and cover other costs during the pandemic. The loans have generous terms, including a low interest rate and forgiveness for portions spent on fixed costs like rent and paychecks for employees who aren’t working.The government has so far relied on traditional banks, like Wells Fargo and Bank of America, to distribute the loans alongside smaller community institutions. The banks have obtained approval for $95 billion of loans, leading lawmakers to discuss adding more money to the program.But these large financial institutions have mostly been willing to work only with existing customers, making it hard for small enterprises that did not previously have accounts with the banks. Banks also tend to rely on paperwork and manual processes that can take days.In part because of the cost of working with these loans, banks have taken a step back from lending to small businesses over the last decade, according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence.That provided an opening for online lenders, which have focused on automating the documentation and approval processes to reduce costs and make it faster. More than 25 such companies have gotten funding from venture capitalists, according to Pitchbook. Those numbers don’t include large financial technology companies like PayPal, Square and Stripe, which have also pushed into lending to small businesses.Online lenders are a small part of the financial industry. But last year, they were the biggest source of loans for small businesses with medium and low credit profiles, according to data released this week by the Federal Reserve.Brock Blake, the chief executive of Lendio, a website that works with online lenders and traditional banks, said that where traditional banks generally took at least a week to approve loans, online lenders could almost always do it within an hour.Lawmakers have noticed the start-ups’ absence. Senator Marco Rubio, the Florida Republican who is chairman of the Senate’s small business subcommittee, has raised concerns about their slowness to participate in the program.“To not leave behind underserved communities and those whose banks won’t help them, we need to get nonbank lenders, including fintechs, into the program as soon as possible,” Mr. Rubio said in a statement on Thursday. He said he was glad the Treasury Department had released the application for the companies and was “pushing to put that on a fast track.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Online lenders are desperate to take part in the program because their business has largely dried up in the pandemic. What’s more, with attractive loans available from the government, few small businesses want any other kind.The chief executive of Toast, which focuses on lending to restaurants, said in a letter this week that it was laying off or furloughing half of its employees. Kabbage made even larger cuts last month, according to Bloomberg. The price of shares in OnDeck, a publicly traded competitor, have dropped more than 50 percent.The government loans are unlikely to be great moneymakers. Small businesses will pay almost no interest, and lenders will get a 5 percent fee from the government for any loans they originate.The companies have lobbied aggressively to take part, asking Congress to allow them to participate and then pushing the agencies to issue guidance making it clear they would be included.While waiting for approval, some of the tech companies have tried to figure out workarounds. Kabbage and PayPal have teamed up with banks to process loans for them.Kabbage said it had already gotten 40,000 applications requesting $4 billion in loans. That allowed it to bring back some of its furloughed workers, but company executives said they would be able to do more robust business with full approval.