The Coronavirus Crisis Is Showing Us How to Live Online
We’ve always hoped that our digital tools would create connections, not conflict. We have a chance to make it happen.By Kevin RooseFor someone who has barely left his house, I’ve had a shockingly busy few days.First, there were the hyperactive group texts, which started up last week with dozens of messages a day from friends about the latest coronavirus news, along with photos of our overstuffed pantries. Then came the FaceTime calls from friends and relatives who were also stuck indoors and trying to stave off loneliness.Last weekend, in between trips to the grocery store, I checked up on some friends using Twitter D.M.s, traded home-cooking recipes on Instagram, and used WhatsApp to join a blockwide support group with my neighbors. I even put on my Oculus virtual reality headset, and spent a few hours playing poker in a V.R. casino with friendly strangers.I expected my first week of social distancing to feel, well, distant. But I’ve been more connected than ever. My inboxes are full of invitations to digital events — Zoom art classes, Skype book clubs, Periscope jam sessions. Strangers and subject-matter experts are sharing relevant and timely information about the virus on social media, and organizing ways to help struggling people and small businesses. On my feeds, trolls are few and far between, and misinformation is quickly being fact-checked.There is no use sugarcoating the virus, which has already had devastating consequences for people all over the world, and may get much worse in the months ahead. There will be more lives lost, businesses closed and communities thrown into financial hardship. Nobody is arguing that what is coming will be fun, easy or anything remotely approaching normal for a very long time.But if there is a silver lining in this crisis, it may be that the virus is forcing us to use the internet as it was always meant to be used — to connect with one another, share information and resources, and come up with collective solutions to urgent problems. It’s the healthy, humane version of digital culture we usually see only in schmaltzy TV commercials, where everyone is constantly using a smartphone to visit far-flung grandparents and read bedtime stories to kids.Already, social media seems to have improved, with more reliable information than might have been expected from a global pandemic. And while the ways we’re substituting for in-person interaction aren’t perfect — over the next few months in America, there may be no phrase uttered more than “Can someone mute?” — we are seeing an explosion of creativity as people try to use technology as a bridge across physical distances.Just look at what’s happening in Italy, where homebound adults are posting mini-manifestos on Facebook, while restless kids flock to multiplayer online games like Fortnite. Or see what’s happening in China, where would-be partyers have invented “cloud clubbing,” a new kind of virtual party in which D.J.s perform live sets on apps like TikTok and Douyin while audience members react in real time on their phones. Or observe how we’re coping in the United States, where groups are experimenting with new kinds of socially distanced gatherings: virtual yoga classes, virtual church services, virtual dinner parties.transcriptHey, everyone. It’s Kevin Roose. I’m a tech reporter at The Times. Like a lot of people, I’m stuck at home. I’ve been sheltered in place for the whole week. I’m not sure how much longer I’ll be here, but it might be awhile. And normally my job consists of reporting on all of these horrible and divisive and anti-social things that people are doing online — you know, bots and trolls and misinformation campaigns. All these things that kind of, like, use the internet to divide us and pull us apart and make us fear and distrust each other. But this week, I saw people using the internet —Are you guys ready?OK.— in a way that I really haven’t seen in a long time.Are you there? Wait —Unmute yourself.I started seeing people —What’s everyone drinking?Oh I want some wine.Now we’re talking.— have virtual happy hours.Today, I’m going to show you a couple of variations for how I like to do clouds.Virtual art lessons.Beans soaking.Virtual cooking classes.Very good. Yum yum.People were using the internet to —(SINGING) Happy birthday to you!— have virtual birthday parties.To sing together.(SINGING) Co-ro-o-o-o-na.It’s got to be boom.Yeah, for sure boom.Inviting people over to play virtual boardgames at their house.The game’s called Exploding Kittens.[CHUCKLES]We’re making banana bread because there’s a virus.In a very literal sense, we are very divided right now.So we’re staying home.Yeah. Nobody is going out.We’re social distancing.Hello!Hi.But I don’t want us to miss this moment.Kuttima.Hi.Hi, kuttima. How are you?I’m fine. How are you?Where, on the internet, in real time, all over the world —[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]— people are pulling together.OK, I need everybody to unmute. And we go lock in. [MAKING ENGINE NOISES]Last night, I was supposed to perform in the Random Farms production of “Annie” as Annie. But due to the stinking coronavirus, it got cancelled. So right now, I’m going to sing my favorite song from “Annie,” because I think we all need a little sunshine. (SINGING) The sun will come out tomorrow.Good morning, and welcome. I must admit it feels very strange to be here at Church of the Nativity without all of you. But I am so grateful that we are able to gather in this way.It’s a request to every Sikh that you get connected via YouTube or Facebook to seek insight.All right, [INAUDIBLE] joining us. We’re about to start. We’re just letting everyone dial in. Shalom aleichem. Thanks for being with us.We are going to share communion together. So if you want to grab a cup of water or a cracker or something so you can participate in that, that’s —[SINGING IN HEBREW]This is Lent. And it’s funny that this time is happening during Lent. Because this is a time when we recognize that we are vulnerable and we are fragile and we are broken. And that we need rescue.[SINGING IN HEBREW]Let me ask you —Yeah?What is something that you wish you could be doing right now, but you can’t?It would probably be ice skating.Yeah, let’s do show and tell.(SINGING) Just stay at home with me.Just stay at home with me.Notice where the air enters your lungs. [BREATHING DEEPLY]Allow your breathing awareness to deepen.And deepen the feeling of relaxation that you’re experiencing.[PRAYING IN PUNJABI]When did you feel gratitude today?What good work did you do today? What good work can you have done better today?This is — this is 20 years old now, this song. Maybe older than somebody watching or listening or whatever.(SINGING “YELLOW” AND PLAYING PIANO) Look at the stars, look how they shine for you and all the things you do.My name is Maz (ph), and I have a boyfriend named Julian. It’s been a week since I’ve seen Julian [SIGHS] because of the coronavirus. I miss him very, very much. [SIGHS]Here’s how the cookies turned out. I did a lot of math, because we only had self-rising flour. That was only one flour left in the grocery store.You don’t have to be any sort of experienced or professional-level dancer. You can do your own moves. You can do the moves I’m doing.3 and 2 and 1. Here we go. Squat down, criss cross. Really think about —And who’s the greatest cook? You are.Me and my dad.All right, guys, I think this is the one.[SPEAKING SPANISH]I think we’ll come through it.What makes you so sure?I think of the four words “this too shall pass.” And this will pass. I believe that.All right, everyone. Love you.All right.Love you.Everyone stay safe.Bye. Good night.These are the kinds of creative digital experiments we need, and they are coming at a time when we need them more than ever.We are on the brink of what Vox’s Ezra Klein calls a “social recession” — an epidemic of loneliness and isolation brought on by the virus. The social recession will hit certain groups especially hard — older people, people with disabilities, people who live alone. But we will all feel isolated to some degree. And as long as it remains unwise to gather in physical spaces, we will need to create virtual spaces that can sustain us.Building a virtual world to replace a broken physical one is not a new idea. It has been a staple in sci-fi narratives for decades, including classics like “Snow Crash” and “Ready Player One.” Many of these stories are dystopian in nature — in them, virtual reality is simply an escape from a real world that is falling apart.But digital tools can also help strengthen our real-world ties if we use them the right way.One thing we know for certain is that actively participating in online culture is far better than passively consuming it. Research shows that people who use social media actively — by sending messages, leaving comments or talking in group chats, for example — report being happier than those who simply scroll through their feeds, absorbing news stories and viral videos. Netflix binges and YouTube rabbit holes are fine for escapism, but if you’re looking to find solace on the internet, lurking alone won’t cut it — you need to contribute.We also know that not all platforms are created equal. With so much alarming information flying around, private group messages and videoconferences are likely to produce calmer, more nourishing interactions than public platforms like Twitter and Facebook, both of which are designed to amplify content that is outrageous, divisive or otherwise highly engaging.All over the country, citizen technologists are using digital tools to strengthen their offline communities. In San Bernardino, Calif., David Perez created a Facebook group called California Coronavirus Alerts to share localized information with his neighbors. A group of public-school teachers in Mason, Ohio, created a Google Doc to share ideas about how to keep teaching students during a state-ordered school closure. In the Bay Area, where I live, people are building databases to keep track of which seniors need help having groceries and prescriptions delivered.It’s possible that this boom in prosocial internet behavior is temporary, and that the grifters and trolls who tend to glom onto major news events will swarm in to ruin it.But it’s also possible that after spending years using technologies that mostly seemed to push us apart, the coronavirus crisis is showing us that the internet is still capable of pulling us together.Updated May 20, 2020Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.That’s why it’s so important that everyone — especially older people, students and people in low-income communities — has access to these tools. The digital divide is real, and in the coming months, those without internet access or devices that can run newer software will be shut out of many of the digital communities we’re building to support one another.In addition to other economic rescue measures, it may be time for a kind of global Geek Squad, an army of tech-savvy people who can deliver free or deeply discounted devices to people who don’t have them, and teach them (from a safe distance) how to join Zoom conferences, send and receive text messages, and make FaceTime calls.Recently, I called Jaron Lanier, the author and technologist who coined the term “virtual reality.” Mr. Lanier, who has been experimenting with building virtual communities for years, said he understood why the idea of moving our offline institutions onto the internet made some people uncomfortable.“We saw the internet turn into this weird, dark manipulation machine,” he said. “Naturally, we worry that this could be another way to become lost or crazy.”But he also said there was reason for cautious optimism, given the creative ways people are already finding to move their real-world support systems online.“The obvious thing to say” about the coronavirus, Mr. Lanier said, “is that people will suffer from a sense of isolation. But there might be some good things. It could reintroduce people to their families. It might make people a little more grounded. It helps you reappreciate the wealth we have in a place like a home. It’s kind of a revelation that we have the good fortune to even be able to do this.”Mr. Lanier is right. As the virus forces us indoors, we should be thinking of ways to invest in our digital spaces, and build robust virtual connections that can replace some of the physical proximity we’re losing, as well as mobilizing to support our real-world communities in a time of enormous need.