How A.I. Steered Doctors Toward a Possible Coronavirus Treatment
By Cade MetzIn late January, researchers at BenevolentAI, an artificial intelligence start-up in central London, turned their attention to the coronavirus.Within two days, using technologies that can scour scientific literature related to the virus, they pinpointed a possible treatment with speed that surprised both the company that makes the drug and many doctors who had spent years exploring its effect on other viruses.Called baricitinib, the drug was designed to treat rheumatoid arthritis. Though many questions hang over its potential use as a coronavirus treatment, it will soon be tested in an accelerated clinical trial with the National Institutes of Health. It is also being studied in Canada, Italy and other countries.The specialists at BenevolentAI are among many A.I. researchers and data scientists around the world who have turned their attention to the coronavirus, hoping they can accelerate efforts to understand how it is spreading, treat people who have it and find a vaccine.Before the pandemic, the A.I. researchers were part of one of the most hyped and well-funded sectors of the tech industry, pursuing visions of autonomous vehicles and machines that can learn by themselves. Now, they are simply trying to be helpful — working on technology that augments human experts instead of replacing them.Medical researchers had spent years exploring baricitinib and similar medications as a way to treat viruses. Baricitinib, a pill taken once a day, can help fight extreme and unwanted activity from the body’s immune system, which occurs with both rheumatoid arthritis and viruses like H.I.V. and can damage healthy cells and tissues.In late January, after talking with one of the company’s investors in Asia about the pandemic, Baroness Joanna Shields, the chief executive of BenevolentAI, asked Peter Richardson, BenevolentAI’s vice president of pharmacology, if the company could explore potential treatments.BenevolentAI quickly joined a race to identify drugs that can block the virus from entering the body’s cells. Researchers at the University of California, San Francisco, and many others labs are looking into similar treatments.BenevolentAI, which has received more than $292 million from the Singapore sovereign wealth fund Temasek, Goldman Sachs and others, had spent the past several years building technology that could help find information buried in vast troves of academic papers and other scientific literature.The technology was designed for the development of new drugs — not for identifying new uses for existing medications — and it had never been used with material related to viruses.Over two days, a small team used the company’s tools to plumb millions of scientific documents in search of information related to the virus. The tools relied on one of the newest developments in artificial intelligence — “universal language models” that can teach themselves to understand written and spoken language by analyzing thousands of old books, Wikipedia articles and other digital text.These A.I. systems are rapidly improving everything from the Google Search engine to automated “chatbots” designed to carry on a conversation. They can also help machines comb through scientific literature, identify particular pieces of information, organize it and retrieve it on command.Using its automated language tools, the company’s engineers generated a detailed and intricately interconnected database of particular biological processes related to the coronavirus. Then Dr. Richardson, who is 65 and a trained pharmacologist, used additional tools to browse through what the technology had found and understand what it meant.“It is not like we have this giant button and we just smack it and stuff comes out the other end,” said Olly Oechsle, 37, the software engineer who oversees the design of these tools. “Peter has been working in this area since before I was born.”Drawing on what the technology found in the literature, Dr. Richardson could map out the connections between particular human genes and the biological processes affected by the coronavirus. As a multicolored map appeared on his computer screen, two genes leapt out at him.“They stood up and said: ‘Look, we’re here,’” Dr. Richardson said.Once the genes were identified, he and his colleagues could pinpoint the way that existing medications targeted the genes, visualizing the process through a kind of digital flow chart. They identified baricitinib, made by the American pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly.Many scientists were already considering similar anti-inflammatory drugs that could reduce a cytokine storm, an extreme response from the body’s immune system that can kill coronavirus patients.But the BenevolentAI researchers went further. Through their software, they found that baricitinib might also prevent the viral infection itself, blocking the way it enters cells. The company said it had no expectations for making money from the research and had no prior relationship with Eli Lilly.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Through Justin Stebbing, a professor of oncology at Imperial College London, the researchers sent their findings to The Lancet, one of Britain’s oldest and most respected medical journals, in early February. Like many other companies and researchers now exploring treatments across the globe, the team wanted to share what it had learned as widely as possible.The next day, at Emory University Hospital in Atlanta, Dr. Vincent Marconi opened an email from a colleague, Dr. Raymond Schinazi, that pointed him and other colleagues to the paper. They had spent eight years exploring baricitinib and other drugs as a treatment for H.I.V., and they knew such drugs could potentially help coronavirus patients.But they had not settled on baricitinib as a viable option, and they had not identified the specific properties that might allow the drug to fight the virus. Nor had the scientists at Eli Lilly.At Emory, the lab researchers were shocked that the paper had come from BenevolentAI. “It was crazy,” said Christina Gavegnano, who took part in the work with H.I.V. “We kept asking: ‘Who are these people? Does anyone know them?’”A month later, Dr. Marconi proposed a clinical trial with baricitinib and another drug. As coronavirus cases mounted at his hospital, he and his clinicians administered the pill as a compassionate measure to patients, with encouraging results.“We normally talk about ‘bench to bedside,’” Dr. Stebbing said, referring to moving quickly from laboratory bench research into the treatment of patients. “This is about ‘computer to bench to bedside.’”Unaware of what was happening in Atlanta, Dr. Mario Corbellino administered the drug as a compassionate measure at a hospital in Milan after reviewing the research from BenevolentAI and soon proposed another clinical trial. He and other infectious-disease specialists, he said, feel more comfortable testing this kind of drug if it has the potential to not just reduce an immune system response but prevent the viral infection.Dr. Dan Skovronsky, chief scientific officer at Eli Lilly, warned that it was still unclear what effect the drug would have on coronavirus patients. Even after the clinical trial, he said, it may not be clear whether the antiviral properties pinpointed by BenevolentAI are as effective as they might seem to be.