You Are Being Influenced
Digital influencers are shaping our habits, even now and even if we’re clueless about it.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.Taylor Lorenz has been writing for years about people who gain a following from their cooking shows on Instagram or sewing channels on YouTube, and then leverage their popularity to sell merchandise or promote companies’ products.Some of you must be thinking: People make money that way? And who cares? Yes, and you should. These “influencers” are shaping our habits, even during a pandemic and even if we’re clueless about it.Taylor talked to me about influencers’ power, their current mix of opportunity and stress, and her STRONG FEELINGS that internet companies could do more to protect us from manic online lives.Shira: Why should we care about influencers?Taylor: Influencers are part of a massive industry that drives retail, marketing, entertainment and more. Companies’ marketing deals with influencers are projected to be far larger than advertising sales for the entire newspaper industry in the United States.The products you see in Target and Walmart are often the influencers’ own products, use their names, are developed with them or are promoted by them.People who say they don’t follow influencers might have scrolled through updates from an Instagram mommy blogger, taken a cruise after seeing someone’s YouTube review or bought needlepoint kits from a person they follow online. Those are probably all influencers!How is the pandemic changing what influencers do?People are spending way more time online, and everything is being shared more and faster than normal. That’s an opportunity, and many influencers are using this time to get more followers and hope the money follows.But burnout is already a big problem, and getting worse. Regular people and celebrities are also making more posts and videos that compete with influencers for our attention. And some influencers could be in trouble if they rely on marketing deals with industries like retail, fashion and travel that are hurting.How will this crisis change how we and social media stars behave online?It might cull influencers who seem out of touch, like those showing off lavish lifestyles. More of us are likely to adapt what young people are already doing. They’re ditching the hyper-perfect aesthetic online, and embracing the chaos of livestreaming and TikTok, where humor and personality matter more than beautiful pictures.How do you feel about people spending more time online now?I worry about the lack of healthy boundaries, and internet companies don’t make it easy to escape. These sites need an option to pause activity, and a universal “away” message to signal that you’re taking a break. I deactivate my Twitter account on many weekends so people can’t message me. Many people do that with Instagram. That’s a sign that people want easier ways to tune out and come back.Who is your must-follow influencer recommendation?I love the quarantine cooking videos from the 18-year-old chef Eitan Bernath. He’s so upbeat!Get this newsletter in your inbox every weekday; please sign up here.In the hundreds of emails you sent us about your experiences shopping online in this pandemic, a number of people asked whether Amazon might offer credit or refunds on Prime membership fees. Short answer: Don’t count on it.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The big promise of the Prime shopping club, which costs $119 for an annual membership in the United States, is fast shipping on eligible items at no added direct cost. As my colleagues (and your emails) have reported, Amazon and many other online stores have been overwhelmed by demand and haven’t been able to sell people everything they want right now, or consistently deliver items at their usual speed.I asked Amazon whether it might return people’s Prime shipping fees. A representative didn’t answer the question, but instead pointed to other perks for Prime, including Amazon’s Netflix-like streaming video service and a rotating selection of e-books to borrow at no additional cost.In surveys, however, a large share of Americans say they signed up for Prime primarily for the shipping. The other benefits are gravy, if people are aware of them at all.Seriously, shopping is a dilemma right now: The Ethicist column in The Times tackles the trade-offs of hiring others to deliver you essentials. This may generate much-needed income for them, but it also shifts the health risks to those workers and possibly reduces delivery options for more vulnerable people. (As I wrote earlier this month, these are all hard choices.)This is a familiar and maddening pattern: A member of the U.S. Army Reserves and her husband have been repeatedly harassed by believers of a baseless conspiracy that she brought the coronavirus to China, CNN reported. The story traces false information spread by a popular American YouTube personality.Lasagna! The Times is collaborating with the chef Samin Nosrat on a virtual communal lasagna cooking day. In a lovely essay, Nosrat writes that she hopes this pandemic will force us to drop all the posturing in our online lives and in-person gatherings and be real with one another.A Shiba Inu dog jamming to tunes in the car. I love Shibas so much.We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.