Big Tech’s Worries Should Worry You
When the most successful companies are anxious, you know we’re in scary times.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.America’s technology superpowers are a little nervous. That’s sensible, and also terrifying.Financial reports filing in from Apple, Amazon, Facebook, Google and others show the big tech companies are holding up OK — great, even. As expected, so far the big and powerful are growing, hiring and spending as many other businesses fight just to survive a pandemic-driven economic freeze.But even the tech titans have lots of shrugs and buts. They’re confident about the far-off future, yet cautious about what’s on the horizon. No one wants to be overly optimistic or overextended.This might be posturing; it’s tacky to gloat when many millions of people have lost their jobs. But the worrying feels genuine. When the most successful companies are anxious, you know we’re in scary times. As the big tech companies talked about dollars and cents this week, pride was the prevailing mood. The bosses at Amazon, Microsoft, Google and Facebook know we’re leaning hard on their products and services. They believe — correctly — that they’ll benefit if we permanently live, work and shop more online.But the nerves were there, too. “I remain very concerned that this health emergency and therefore the economic fallout will last longer than people are currently anticipating,” Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, said.Both Zuckerberg and Google’s executives said — again correctly — that they’re at the mercy of economic ups and downs. If people aren’t buying new cars, Ford isn’t going to buy as many ads on Facebook, Google or The New York Times.It’s sensible caution, but it’s unusual for Zuckerberg to stress Facebook’s inherent fragility. He also talked more than I’ve ever heard before about keeping his company’s spending in check so Facebook has a cushion for bad times.Facebook and Google said that they weren’t hiring as much as expected in some areas and that they planned to spend less than they forecast on new buildings and other big-ticket items. These companies are doing well, and they’re still doing the rich company’s version of pinching pennies.Apple, Amazon and Google said they couldn’t predict what their numbers would look like in the next few months. Apple hadn’t done that in more than a decade, Bloomberg News reported.Even though we’re shopping a ton on Amazon, the company isn’t cashing in. Amazon is barely breaking even on our jars of peanut butter and toilet paper. And the company is spending a fortune to make sure shoppers get what they want and employees are safe — areas where the company has struggled.The tech companies that now seem unassailable were tiny little things, relatively speaking, the last time there was a recession. Facebook was a toddler, and Amazon was still getting most of its money from books, CDs and DVDs.People have wondered how these 21st-century titans would fare in the next recession. We’re going to find out. It looks like they’ll be just fine, but even they’re not so sure.Get this newsletter in your inbox every weekday; please sign up here.This pandemic is exposing the divide between the internet haves and have-nots.In a recent survey by the Pew Research Center, one in five American parents with kids now home said it was somewhat or very likely that their children wouldn’t be able to complete their classwork online. The reasons they cited included a lack of access to a computer or internet connection at home. And about 30 percent of parents said it’s at least somewhat likely that their children would have to do assignments on a cellphone.The Pew survey backed what my Times colleagues have written about the struggles of families in rural or low-income households as many school districts moved to online instruction. Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Among the parents in the Pew survey with lower incomes, about 40 percent said their kids may have to use Wi-Fi in public places to do schoolwork, because there wasn’t reliable internet at home. The figure was just 6 percent among higher-income survey respondents. There are so many bogus claims about artificial intelligence: But the Times technology reporter Cade Metz found a genuinely helpful outcome when London researchers used an artificial intelligence tool to scour scientific literature for possible coronavirus treatments. Two days later, it identified an arthritis medication with so much potential that it is being fast-tracked.Employers, WHAT are you doing? Companies are buying software that catalogs everything employees do, say, watch and listen to while working from home, The Washington Post reports. Software can flag, for example, when people are typing words like “job” and “client,” which might signal employees are looking for new jobs. Another option: trusting people to be adults.Is Silicon Valley the next Detroit? Margaret O’Mara, a contributing Opinion writer at The Times, writes that after World War II, American car companies could no longer resist tighter safety and emissions rules and workers’ demands for better pay. She believes today’s tech superpowers may be similarly transformed in coming years by more regulation and employee activism.No, I’m not crying. (Sniff.) Volunteer staff members at a Florida pet kennel cheered at the empty cages. All the good doggos had been adopted for the first time ever. We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com. 