Tiny Digital Businesses Play Key Role in Local Economies, Study Says
By Steve LohrThis article is part of our continuing Fast Forward series, which examines technological, economic, social and cultural shifts that happen as businesses evolve.In the vast ocean of modern online commerce, Candis Jones, who designs and makes women’s jewelry, is a minnow.No venture capitalist will ever come knocking on her door in Westerville, Ohio. But with skill and hard work, digitally amplified by her website, online store and Instagram account, Ms. Jones has transformed a basement craft project into a healthy little business.All that is in doubt now as the economic fallout from the coronavirus outbreak worsens. Her business has not fallen off a cliff yet, down about 20 percent so far but slowing further in the last couple of weeks.Every sale, Ms. Jones said, is cause for “celebration” and “a vote for us to make it through this.”There are millions of small, digitally enabled ventures like hers across America. New research, based on data from 20 million websites, found that these small-scale entrepreneurs generate significant spillover benefits to their communities.The analysis also concluded that counties with more of these ventures experienced stronger recoveries from the last recession than elsewhere, suggesting that “these small web businesses can be an important buffer for individuals and local communities facing economic challenges,” said Marcela Escobari, an economic development expert and a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, who was not involved in the new study.The new analysis, conducted by researchers at Arizona State University and the University of Iowa, is based on a data set assembled and provided by GoDaddy, a large retailer of internet domain names and a website-hosting service.The company is making the data publicly available on a website with quarterly and later monthly updates. So while the analysis predates the coronavirus outbreak, the regularly refreshed data should help track how a little-studied sector of the economy weathers the downturn.The new data, the researchers said, adds an important dimension to understanding the digital economy. It is, they said, a counterpoint to recent studies that show the clustering of leading-edge technology, investment and employment in a handful of superstar cities.“While that’s true, there is also this digitally enabled economic activity at the grass-roots level that we haven’t really been able to see clearly before,” said Karen Mossberger, a professor of public policy at Arizona State.The data set from GoDaddy includes information on its customers combined with third-party data and surveys, all stripped of personally identifying information. It includes estimates of website activity like traffic and links, location by county and ZIP code, and the purpose — a commercial site, a nonprofit or for personal or family use.Each active website, in GoDaddy’s labeling, is a “venture.” An estimated three-quarters are business related.Its intent, GoDaddy said, is that researchers and lawmakers will use the data to inform public policy to nurture small web-enabled entrepreneurs. The company said the initiative was mainly an “educational research project,” though GoDaddy stands to gain if the ranks of web entrepreneurs grow.The company shared the data set initially with Ms. Mossberger and Caroline Tolbert, a professor at the University of Iowa, who are scholars of “digital participation” in economic, political and civic activity.GoDaddy did provide modest grants to the universities for support costs like compensating graduate students working on the study. The company, the academics said, had no say in their research. The study is now a working paper, written with a third co-author, Scott LaCombe, a doctoral graduate student at Iowa. They plan to publish their research in scholarly journals and present it at conferences.Their analysis sought to tease out the effect on communities of web ventures. For example, they found that each highly active venture — like Ms. Jones’s site — per 100 people added $331 to the growth in the median household income in a county over a two-year period. The effect, the researchers said, holds up even after stripping out factors like household income, education level, ethnicity, geography and the local mix of industries.Digital participation research, Ms. Tolbert said, has often focused on access to broadband technology and its impact on communities. The new data, she said, affords a deeper look.“It’s a measure of community human capital,” Ms. Tolbert said. “Having the technology is one thing, but can they use it? This gives us a powerful new window into local economies.”For economic development, the data may offer a fresh perspective on where technology fits in. Trying to lure a big tech company with tax breaks to make an investment may be misguided, Ms. Mossberger said.A better option for most communities, she said, could well be programs geared to helping tiny ventures and skills development.In recent years, academic, government and corporate researchers have experimented with anonymized data from bank and credit card accounts, credit-rating agencies and other sources to try to get a more detailed picture of the small-scale entrepreneurial activity.Some of that recent research suggests a sharp increase in female and minority entrepreneurs in a trend that cannot be captured by standard government surveys alone. “Traditional sources are not accurately reflecting who the new entrepreneurs are,” said Claire Kramer Mills, director of community development analysis at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.A study, sponsored by American Express, estimated that the number of businesses owned by African-American women increased nearly 50 percent from 2014 to 2019.A Maryland cheesecake business, founded last year by two sisters, is one of them. Nikki Howard and Jaqi Wright were federal workers on furlough during the 35-day government shutdown that ended in late January 2019.During the budget standoff, Ms. Howard baked cheesecakes for a church social. Her mother tried a piece and told her that it tasted good enough to sell. The out-of-work sisters decided to give it a try, and they named their fledgling venture the Furlough Cheesecake.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.They bought the domain name, built the website using simplified templates and set up online billing and payment accounts by themselves.Ms. Howard’s daughters, both in their 20s, created the company logo and handled the Facebook, Instagram and Twitter outreach. It got noticed, and appearances on local television and “The Ellen DeGeneres Show” followed.Last year, the sisters, who quit their government jobs, sold nearly 6,000 cheesecakes. The most popular lines sell for $35 each plus $5 for packed-in-dry-ice shipping.So far, their baking has been done in church kitchens and at a commercial bakery that allowed them to use its ovens on nights and weekends. Their family and friends have all pitched in, mainly as volunteers, to help with baking and packing.Before the coronavirus outbreak, Ms. Howard and Ms. Wright were looking for a permanent space to combine baking, freezing and packing, with room for a retail shop as well.But those plans are on hold now. Sales have fallen 50 percent. They have taken inventory out of their freezers and donated cheesecakes to a home for older people and to a local police station.The sisters have looked at government loan programs for businesses affected by the pandemic. But theirs is a new company without full-time employees. They don’t yet own buildings or equipment — assets to serve as collateral for loans.“We don’t seem to quite qualify yet,” Ms. Howard said.Most small online ventures, according to the GoDaddy data, remain side hustles. About one-fifth of the entrepreneurs surveyed said their web businesses were their main source of income. But more than half said their web ventures generated some household income.For Ms. Jones in Ohio, her necklaces have found a market with women like her, mothers who wanted something attractive yet sturdy enough to withstand a toddler’s tug. Her business is a pillar of income, along with her husband’s salary as a high school art teacher, to support their household with two young children. Total sales last year were more than $100,000. She supports a full-time contractor to help make the jewelry.Her offerings, mostly priced from $17 to $35, could be pitched as inexpensive pick-me-up purchases in bad times. But she has cut back her online promotions as the pandemic has spread, not wanting to strike an insensitive note.