What to Do When Your Uncle Believes Coronavirus Conspiracies
Believing in online hoaxes can be dangerous now. Here’s how we can all help.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.It’s not unusual for my relatives or friends to talk about kooky ideas. But now others’ believing in hoaxes or bad information feels dangerous. This drug is a miracle cure! Blame this billionaire for the virus!I tried to figure out what we can do when someone we love believes in coronavirus conspiracies they see online.What I learned is we need to have empathy for people who are afraid of a scary illness. We should be on the lookout for those who have reasons to talk up misinformation. And with trust in authority figures falling among many Americans, we can step in and spread good information to people who trust us and model good behavior.“Conspiracy theories seem especially likely to take hold during disasters and tragedies when people experience a loss of control and are trying to make sense of the world,” said Brendan Nyhan, a Dartmouth College professor who studies misperceptions about politics and health care.Nyhan said the worst thing you can do is shame people in your social circle for what they believe. Don’t be too hard on your cousin who posts that cellphone towers contribute to coronavirus infections. Don’t be that lobbyist who typed “IDIOTS” about people protesting stay-at-home orders.We’re fallible. Sometimes we worry about the wrong things. Reasonable people can disagree, particularly when knowledge about this virus keeps shifting.We also need to train ourselves and our loved ones to look behind the curtain for people with a political message and others who have incentives to fan our fears in crises, said Renée DiResta, who researches disinformation at the Stanford Internet Observatory.But Nyhan said it’s counterproductive to spend too much energy trying to refute people we disagree with, whether it’s friends, talking heads on television or politicians. If we put all our attention on misinformation, he said, “the communication becomes too focused on what’s not true rather than what is.”Instead, he said it’s better to amplify accurate messages. Nyhan credited sports stars like Steph Curry, health care officials and entertainers who helped spread the message that the coronavirus was dangerous and that people could best protect themselves by staying home as much as possible and keeping their distance from people outside their households.Like those celebrities, we can spread helpful information to people who believe what we say.Nyhan and DiResta, who has written extensively about misinformation about vaccines, said they were worried that fear-mongering or a lack of trust in government authorities will undermine a potential coronavirus vaccine. We might be able to help there, too.Maybe your brother doesn’t trust the C.D.C., Nyhan said, but he probably does trust you, his kid’s school principal and his church deacon. They should tout the importance of vaccines. Someone in our lives relies on us. And we can harness that trust to help keep ourselves informed and our communities safe.We talked in Wednesday’s newsletter about people’s mixed experiences shopping on Amazon in this pandemic. There’s evidence that many are shopping more than usual at places other than Amazon.After years of Americans devoting bigger chunks of our online spending to Amazon, we are shifting in the other direction for now.Out of every dollar that Americans spent shopping online in the week ending April 10, about 35.5 cents was on Amazon. Until then, Amazon was getting about 40 to 44 cents of each online spending dollar, according to the market research firm Rakuten Intelligence.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.It’s hard to know exactly why. Companies like Home Depot and especially Target, plus the groceries delivery service Instacart, are getting more of our online dollars than they typically do, Rakuten figures show. It may be because we’re buying more groceries, which people don’t tend to buy on Amazon. Or Amazon’s shortages and shipping delays may be turning some people off.Amazon’s delivery times, which had been hovering around two days on average, went as high as four days in mid-March, Rakuten said. Delivery speeds have started to fall back down. Shipping times of other companies, which usually take longer to deliver than Amazon, also slowed down.Fun fact: Before this pandemic, about 85 percent of Americans’ retail spending still happened in physical stores. If this crisis makes us shop online more, Amazon will be a big winner. But more competition might make everyone try harder for our money.When the boss cares about the details again: After years of focusing on the big picture, Amazon’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos, has dived back into day-to-day company management during the pandemic, my colleague Karen Weise reports. Bezos is participating in daily calls about product inventory, obsessing about coronavirus testing and is getting involved in Amazon’s response to public criticism.Is Twitter good now? That’s what a trio of my smart and hilarious colleagues debated. Personally, if my options are: scroll Twitter, wash my endless pile of dishes or have an honest thought about my own fears … then TWITTER IT IS.TikTok is influencing how musicians title their songs. To make sure people can search for their songs online, musicians are changing vague titles like “ily” to match the snippets of lyrics people hear on TikTok, Rolling Stone writes. Dance routines on the short-video app are where many people discover new music. Also: You gotta applaud the creativity of teenagers remaking prom on TikTok. Look at these girls!Bob Ross petting a baby deer. That’s it. Just watch it. (And if you share my love for television’s prolific, dulcet-voiced landscape painter, you will enjoy this mystery of where all his artwork went.)You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.