This Pandemic Exposes the Downsides of Cheap Uber Rides
An economic and health crisis is exposing how vulnerable Uber workers really are.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.Many of us have benefited from the convenience of services like Uber and Instacart. But now in an economic and health crisis, their workers are highly vulnerable, and no one has their backs.Here’s how this happened, and who is to blame. Short version: Blame everyone, including ourselves.How we got here:In the United States, people who drive or deliver for Uber — and for companies like Lyft, Postmates, DoorDash and more — are hired as contractors not employees. That means the companies aren’t required to provide them benefits and protections like health insurance and a minimum wage.Some people who work for these companies like the flexibility of contract work. But the lack of health insurance, sick pay and other protections for many Americans, including Uber contractors, is stark now.More people are skipping Uber rides altogether, leaving drivers with little income. And contractors are exposed to health risks when they do drive for Uber or go grocery shopping for Instacart.Blame Uber:For years, Uber and its peers delayed a reckoning about its contract work force, which numbers in the millions.Only recently, as lawsuits and laws questioned whether Uber workers are actually conventional employees, the company and others have stepped up their push for a “third way” to give workers some flexibility of contractor life with some employee-like protections.Uber, Lyft and other companies are also using this crisis as an opportunity. They helped persuade the U.S. government to extend unemployment benefits to freelancers. That’s good for millions of people in financial difficulty, but it also sticks American taxpayers with the bill for worker protections Uber could have provided all along.Uber also is paying drivers and delivery couriers who can prove they’re probably sick and are ordered to isolate themselves. It’s not clear how many people are eligible for a payment or have received one.The company also asked for a temporary legal break so it could offer some worker benefits, without those facts being used against it in court cases seeking to reclassify Uber workers as employees. That’s an understandable step to protect Uber’s business. It’s also gross.Blame ourselves, and our government:I started writing this pointing the finger at Uber and other companies that summon contract workers at the tap of a smartphone app. It’s not that simple, though.We have to admit that when Uber, Instacart and Postmates rely on contractors, it benefits us as well as those companies’ bottom lines. If these companies instead hired masses of employees with benefits, the services they provide probably wouldn’t be as ubiquitous or affordable. Uber might not exist at all outside big cities.And Uber is far from the only company relying on non-employee workers, in part because it’s cheaper to hire and fire them. That exposes the downsides of government decisions in the United States to tie many basic protections to our employer.I’m not sure companies like Uber can continue to rely on an all-contract work force. That’s going to be a huge challenge for Uber. It’s also a problem for all of us who enjoyed cheap, handy services that leave workers exposed.Get this newsletter in your inbox every weekday; please sign up here.A reader, Caroline Ayres, recently asked us for advice on blocking out noise while she’s working from home:I love my family, but with two teenagers, a dog, a cat and a preschool for kids of emergency providers in the downstairs of my building, working from home is a bit of a challenge during coronavirus. My question is: What noise-canceling headphones do I need to buy?Lauren Dragan from the Wirecutter, a product recommendation site owned by The Times, shared this advice:Hi, Caroline! The first thing you should know is that noise-canceling headphones — while fantastic for low frequency, sustained sounds like airplane noise — aren’t effective on human voices, dog barks or other high-pitched sounds.What blocks those sounds out is a physical barrier to the sound waves, often referred to as “passive isolation.” While some noise-canceling headphones, like the Bose NC 700 or Jabra Elite 85h, also have decent passive isolation, they’re often expensive.The best way to block out kiddo shenanigans is to use isolating earbuds. Nearly any earbud you love (that fits securely) can be upgraded to better block sounds by adding sound isolating foam tips.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.If you don’t have earbuds already, we’d suggest the Jabra Elite 75t, as they work well for video calls. Or if you want something more affordable, the 1 More Piston Fit BT are a great option.Another tip is to use white noise (or ocean or rain sounds) via an app to help mask the sound around you. Just be sure to keep your laptop volume below 60 percent to protect your ears.A final resort, and I’m only half-joking, is to buy wireless earbuds and wear hearing-protection earmuffs over them. Not the most comfortable setup, but man, it’s effective. Trust me. I have a 4-year-old.The iPad is the gadget of the pandemic. Brian X. Chen, the personal tech columnist for The Times, writes that the iPad has transformed from an “other” device to a go-to screen for video calls, cooking tutorials and distraction-free emailing (with an add-on keyboard).Policing Facebook ain’t easy, example infinity. The company says posts encouraging protests against states’ pandemic lockdown rules are fine, as long as the protesters abide by states’ pandemic lockdown rules, Bloomberg News reported. Drawing the line between free speech and protecting public safety can lead to head-scratching rule-making.Competitive. Marble. Racing. Watching YouTube videos of marbles steamrolling down tracks or negotiating hurdles (!) is a balm in the absence of human sports, as my colleague Mariel Padilla writes. There are even play-by-play announcers, marble “fans” and a cappella team chants.Is it bad that I feel jealous of the pizza groundhog? Just munching without a care in the world.We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.