How Your Airbnb Host Is Feeling the Pain of the Coronavirus
Supported byBy Erin GriffithSAN FRANCISCO — Livia De Felice, who owns two vacation rental properties and manages four others across Italy, has seen all of her bookings for March canceled, leaving her “extremely worried,” she said.Austin Mao, who hosts 2,000 guests a month in his Las Vegas network of mansions, has slashed prices on the properties by 10 percent and plans to keep cutting as visitors dwindle.And Tracey Northcott and her husband, who manage 12 vacation apartments in Tokyo, said the occupancy rate had gone from 80 percent to zero since January.“I’ve got to keep paying my mortgage somehow,” said Ms. Northcott, who employs three full-time and five part-time cleaners and administrators and has started dipping into her retirement savings to pay the bills.Ms. De Felice, Mr. Mao and Ms. Northcott are part of a network of people behind seven million rental listings on Airbnb, the home-sharing and rental site, who are now feeling the brunt of the coronavirus fallout. With travel screeching to a halt in many places to limit the outbreak’s spread, the problems facing Airbnb and other online travel sites, such as Booking.com and VRBO, have rapidly escalated.The toll that the virus is taking on the $688 billion online travel industry is shared by airlines and big hotel chains. But unlike the Marriotts and Hiltons or carriers like United and JetBlue, many online travel sites are underpinned by listings from individual homeowners and smaller hotel operators, who typically have fewer resources to withstand a prolonged slump.The pain is already widespread. Booking.com, which has 6.3 million listings for “alternative accommodations,” including apartments and vacation homes, pulled its financial forecast on Monday. The company said worsening conditions made it impossible to “reliably quantify” the impact of the virus on its business, which also sells hotel stays and plane tickets.“The world has changed, and we have to adjust,” Glenn Fogel, Booking.com’s chief executive, said in a recent interview, adding that his company had also pulled back on advertising.Expedia Group, which owns VRBO, Hotels.com and more than a dozen other travel sites, has said it expected a $30 million to $40 million hit to operating profit in the first quarter. The company recently laid off 12 percent of its work force, or more than 3,000 employees, which it said was part of a previously planned restructuring.“It truly is an unknown,” Barry Diller, Expedia’s chairman, said of the coronavirus on an investor call last month. “All we’re trying to do is separate what we absolutely believe is the effect of the virus from our ongoing business, so we can prepare ourselves and make that ongoing business as strong as possible when this thing is over.”One of the hardest hit may be Airbnb, where millions of hosts have listed their properties for short stays since the company was founded in 2008. (Airbnb takes a cut of their fee.) Over the years, Airbnb hosts have become increasingly sophisticated, with mini-economies springing up to cater to the hosts’ needs for cleaning and management of the properties. Competitors like Booking.com followed by moving into rentals of vacation homes.Now Airbnb finds itself on strategically tricky ground.The San Francisco company, valued at $31 billion by private investors, said in September that it planned to go public this year — even though the initial public offering market for high-profile, money-losing start-ups has been rocky. Airbnb has indicated that it planned to go public via an unusual method known as a direct listing, where no new shares are sold. And it is under pressure to complete a listing this year because some of its current and former employees’ shares in the company will otherwise expire.The offering may now be in question. Nick Papas, an Airbnb spokesman, would only refer to the company’s previous announcement that it planned to go public this year. But stock market volatility and a big blow to business from the virus may make it unthinkable for any company to go public soon.Last week, Brian Chesky, Airbnb’s chief executive, sent an email to employees outlining the company’s response to the virus. In the message, he said Airbnb would grant some refunds to customers and establish a $10 million fund to support Chinese rental operators while tourism to the country, where the outbreak started, has halted.“Airbnb was born during a global crisis,” Mr. Chesky wrote, referring to the 2008 financial crisis and without mentioning the company’s I.P.O. plans. “It didn’t stop us then, and it won’t stop us now.”Airbnb faces other coronavirus fallout, including a sponsorship of the Tokyo Olympics this summer that may be in peril if the event is canceled. The International Olympic Committee has said it is fully committed to holding the games, and will follow the advice of the World Health Organization.Most of all, Airbnb is dealing with a potential decline in revenue because travelers are canceling stays with their hosts.Jasper Ribbers, who runs a company called Get Paid for Your Pad in Sofia, Bulgaria, that provides coaching for Airbnb hosts, has advised those in regions affected by the virus to reduce nightly prices, cut costs and seek alternative uses for their spaces, like finding long-term renters.“Some hosts are doing events or letting local artists use the apartments for photo shoots,” he said.Mr. Mao, the Airbnb host in Las Vegas, began cutting prices on his properties last month and said he would continue doing so as bookings slowed. Each of his homes had been bringing around $10,000 a month, with fixed costs of just $3,500. While he saw only a slight dip in bookings in early March, he said, he expects that to deepen as fear of the coronavirus intensifies.Mr. Mao said he also had stopped work at a construction business he runs, where he employs 10 people who renovate homes for renting.“I believe this is a harbinger of the next great recession, so I think it’s risky to expand,” he said.In Tokyo, Ms. Northcott, who has been an Airbnb host for eight years, said she had been trying to find other work for her cleaners, who are paid by the job. Her business, Tokyo Family Stays, lost around $2,000 worth of bookings in January, $10,000 in February, $25,000 so far in March and $40,000 for April, which is normally the biggest month of the year.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.If the virus spreads, she and her husband may try to find corporate jobs, she said.“It seems that it is always the small businesses who are left to figure things out for themselves,” she said.Mr. Papas declined to disclose details on the costs of Airbnb’s virus-related cancellations. The company has let people traveling to and from China, South Korea and parts of Italy cancel their bookings with full refunds. It said it was individually evaluating other situations, including people whose flights were canceled or who were restricted from traveling.On Tuesday, Airbnb announced a program called More Flexible Reservations, which will allow hosts to more easily offer refunds to guests. Service fees on trips booked now through June 1 that do not fall under the company’s extenuating-circumstances policy will also be refundable with travel coupons for a future journey.Some customers who booked trips before the new program took effect are unhappy. Dr. Peter Shields, a cancer researcher at Ohio State University, booked a two-week trip to Japan for this month with nearly $10,000 of reservations at two Airbnbs for his family. After the outbreak worsened and his employer restricted foreign travel, he canceled.But because Japan does not fall under Airbnb’s extenuating-circumstances policy, Dr. Shields struggled to secure refunds. He tussled with Airbnb’s customer support, emailed Mr. Chesky directly and filed a Better Business Bureau complaint. He was eventually refunded for one reservation and 70 percent of the other — but was then told that the first one had been done by mistake.“The answer I’m getting is: You’re out of luck,” he said.Airbnb said 60 percent of its reservations had policies that allowed for half or full refunds. It added of Dr. Shields, “We apologize for this error and have taken action to address this matter and help ensure these kinds of issues don’t happen again in the future.”In his memo to employees, Mr. Chesky tried to stay optimistic.