This Was Supposed to Be the Year Driverless Cars Went Mainstream
By Cade Metz and Erin GriffithSAN FRANCISCO — Tech companies once promised that fully functional, self-driving cars would be on the road by 2020 and on the path to remaking transportation and transforming the economy.But a decade after Google unveiled an autonomous car prototype with global fanfare, the technology is still far from ready, and many investors are wary of dumping more money into it — just when the world could benefit from cars that ferry people and deliver packages without a human driver.The companies that made these promises are now in a jam: To perfect their technology, they need to test it on roads. But they need at least two people in the cars to avoid accidents. Because of social distancing rules meant to keep people safe during the coronavirus pandemic, that is often not possible. So many cars are sitting in lots.“This is a difficult time for everyone,” said Bryan Salesky, the chief executive of the start-up Argo AI, which is backed by $1 billion from Ford and another $1 billion in promised funding from Volkswagen. “We want to get back on the road as soon as it is safe to do so. There is no substitute for on-road testing.”The timeout caused by the pandemic has hastened an industry shakeout that was already starting to happen. Many self-driving car companies have no revenue, and the operating costs are unusually high. Autonomous vehicle start-ups spend $1.6 million a month on average — four times the rate at financial tech or health care companies, according to PitchBook, which tracks financial activity across the industry.It’s a sharp turn from 2016, when an investment bubble in self-driving technology started. General Motors acquired Cruise, a three-year-old, 40-person start-up, for roughly $1 billion including performance incentives. A few months later, Uber announced that it would pay around $680 million for Otto, a six-month-old autonomous trucking start-up.The price tags for those deals worked out to about $10 million per engineer, and that became the going rate. A fledgling three-person start-up, for example, valued itself at $30 million.Now one self-driving car start-up has gone out of business, and another is for sale. Four have laid off employees. And bigger companies are hunkering down to wait out the delays.Cruise said that although it had gotten some cars back on the road by making deliveries for two food banks in San Francisco, its testing had been curtailed. Last week, Ford, which has temporarily closed factories because of the virus, pushed the launch of its autonomous service from 2021 to 2022.At Waymo, the self-driving car unit of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, the pandemic has set work back at least two months because of social distancing rules and trouble getting hardware from other countries, John Krafcik, the company’s chief executive, said in an interview on Monday. Waymo said on Tuesday that it had raised $750 million in funding, adding to the $2.25 billion it secured at the beginning of March.The start-up Zoox, which investors have valued at $2.7 billion, recently hired the investment bank Qatalyst Partners to explore a potential sale while it also tries to raise new funding, according to two people familiar with the effort, who were not allowed to speak about it on the record. The news was reported earlier by The Information.There have been layoffs at Zoox, at the autonomous trucking companies Ike and Kodiak Robotics, and at Velodyne Lidar, which makes the Lidar sensors that are an essential part of most autonomous driving. Lyft, which recently laid off or furloughed more than 1,000 employees, said its autonomous division was affected.“It was appropriate and necessary to be conservative about our cash burn,” said Ike’s chief executive, Alden Woodrow. “That had to happen.”Before the pandemic, Voyage, a start-up in Silicon Valley, tested its autonomous vehicles inside retirement communities in California and Florida. Realizing the limits of self-driving technology, the start-up was focused on situations where its cars would face less traffic — and less chaos, said Oliver Cameron, the company’s chief executive.On a recent morning, Mr. Cameron and several of his engineers logged onto a Zoom videoconference call. A virtual recreation of The Villages, a retirement community in San Jose, Calif., appeared on their screens. The simulation was built from digital data collected over the past several years by cameras and other sensors installed on the cars.Inside the digital simulation, the company’s autonomous vehicle slowed behind a parked car as traffic approached from ahead. It stopped to let the oncoming traffic pass, but then stalled, failing to proceed once the road was clear. With simulated tests, companies like Voyage could make some progress, but not all scenarios could be tested.“Simulation is not something you do in a vacuum, without any connection with the real world and real data,” said Davide Bacchet, Voyage’s vice president of engineering. “We can only progress to the point where the simulation is accurate.”Mr. Cameron estimated the company’s latest autonomous vehicle had already been delayed by four months, partly because of hardware supply-chain slowdowns in China. Voyage has raised $52 million, which he said would last until the end of 2021. But until the technology is ready, no revenue will be coming in.Autonomous driving research was derailed, in part, by a death in Arizona. In March 2018, one of Uber’s autonomous vehicles killed a pedestrian in Tempe. Many companies temporarily took their cars off the road, and after it was revealed that only one technician was inside the Uber car, most companies resolved to keep two people in their test vehicles at all times.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“That was a clear moment in time where the whole industry went from being a bull market to a bear market,” Mr. Cameron said. “Covid has taken us even further into the bear market.”It became clear that the technology was years from being ready. The cars still made mistakes in unexpected ways. And crossing the safety hurdles would take much longer than had been expected.Before the pandemic hit, “there was a broad recognition, within the industry, that this was a much harder problem,” said Anand Gopalan, the chief executive of Velodyne. Waymo, for example, operated an automated car service in Phoenix, but rides still required safety drivers behind the wheel.In the coming months, some of the better-funded companies can draw on money that is already in the bag. Argo AI, the self-driving company started by Ford, for example, can most likely lean on the Volkswagen money.Others aren’t as fortunate. As the pandemic approached in February, Starsky Robotics, an autonomous trucking start-up, shut down. It tried to sell its assets, but potential buyers were skittish, said the chief executive, Stefan Seltz-Axmacher.Last year, Drive.ai, a start-up backed by $77 million, sold to Apple. One of Drive.ai’s investors, the venture firm NEA, narrowed its autonomous investment focus to robots in places like retail warehouses.