When Tech Helps the Vulnerable
Tens of millions of Americans have lost their jobs. Here’s how one tech company is helping.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.There’s a stereotype that tech start-ups are focused on trivial things. And while there are plenty of pizza-delivery and dog walking apps, there also are technologists working on serious problems.At a time when tens of millions of Americans have lost jobs, it is important to highlight how companies are using technology to help others.Propel, as I mentioned last week, started in 2014 to help food stamp recipients access benefits on their phones, clip coupons and apply for jobs.Now that more people are struggling, Propel is also offering its customers practical guides to pandemic-related government services, and it’s directing $1,000 cash payments, funded by charities, to individuals.About 38 million lower-income Americans receive food stamp benefits through the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP. Their needs — and their numbers — are growing now.Jimmy Chen, Propel’s 32-year-old founder and chief executive, said nearly nine in 10 people who use Propel’s app said they had lost their job or had work hours cut since the pandemic hit. Some states have said the number of new applications for SNAP started to soar in March.Propel has started to incorporate more coronavirus-specific help into its app. It walks people through whether new legislation makes them eligible for higher food stamp payments, and it directs people to help obtaining government stimulus checks.Propel also recently linked with charitable organizations to direct $1,000 cash donations at random to people who use its app. The idea is to get money quickly to people who might need help paying rent or other bills. Chen said Propel has distributed more than $10 million so far.Propel’s app isn’t magic. Its main feature lets people check the balance on their food stamp accounts instead of calling a government hotline.But as is true for many social safety-net programs, applying for and using food stamps can be maddening. My colleague Tara Siegel Bernard wrote recently that in some states, people can’t use SNAP benefits to buy groceries online or at curbside supermarket pickups — options that are appealing as people try to avoid stores. (Propel’s app doesn’t help with this.)Chen sounded annoyed when he talked about technology start-ups that overwhelmingly target their products and services at higher-income people. “People have a total blind spot about how much money lower-income people spend, and how poorly served they are,” he said.He is speaking from personal experience. Chen said that when he was 10 years old, his father lost his job and at times his family had trouble putting food on the table.Chen said he hoped that Propel is “the kind of company that my parents would have loved to use when I was growing up.”Brian X. Chen, our personal tech columnist, reminds us that we don’t always have to buy new stuff.With so many people worried about money right now, it’s a good moment to learn how to take better care of our electronics and extend their lives.Some of my past columns have gone over the basics for how to keep our computers, smartphones and tablets running longer. The steps include expanding storage, adding memory and replacing batteries.If you are going to do just one thing this week to extend your gadgets’ lives, I encourage you to take a look at how much storage you are using on your devices and purge unnecessary apps, files and media. The more of this you have saved, the slower your devices get.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Here’s a starting point: On iPhones, check out iPhone Storage, which lists apps that take up the most data and when you used them last. On Android devices, Google offers a similar tool called Files. Deleting the data-hogging apps that you haven’t touched in months is a simple way to make your phone perkier.Do you have a laptop stowed in the closet that you want to revive, or are curious how to keep that old TV set working for longer?Email ontech@nytimes.com with your D.I.Y. questions, and we’ll answer a selection with help from our friends at Wirecutter and other experts. Please put “gadget S.O.S.” in the subject line.From Google to the Pentagon: The former Google C.E.O., Eric Schmidt, says he is convinced that technology, some of it relatively untested in military settings, would improve U.S. defense and intelligence operations, my colleagues Kate Conger and Cade Metz report. Schmidt is frustrated by the slow pace of change, but he has faced complaints that he is benefiting financially from what he’s pitching the Pentagon.Sleepy sheep and the dogs of Chernobyl: The Times writer David Pogue crammed a recent weekend with virtual tourist activities, including a video tour of dogs living in the former Ukrainian nuclear zone and a magic class. David said the online experiences were an imperfect but ingenious way to absorb himself in another world.When the city council pitches sweet potatoes: Low-level government officials in China are shooting short videos and webcasts to drum up online buyers for products made or farmed in their areas, the Chinese publication Sixth Tone reported.An adorable 3-year-old sheep handler guides a playful sheep named Ethel.We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.