‘We Can Do Better’: One Plan to Erase America’s Digital Divide
Never has the necessity of the internet been so clear, nor has the cost to those who go without.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.With many millions of Americans working or attending virtual school from home during the coronavirus pandemic, the longstanding gap between those who have reliable, affordable internet and those who don’t has never been so clear.Susan Crawford, a Harvard Law School professor, has said for years that America’s internet system is broken. She advocates government intervention to help finance and oversee online pipelines, as happened previously for essential services like telephone lines and electricity.Susan’s critics say she’s proposing an unviable government overreach. But it’s clear the status quo isn’t working, so I talked to Susan about her proposed solutions.How big is the problem, exactly?No one really knows, Susan says. Microsoft estimates that 157 million Americans — about half the population — aren’t using relatively fast internet connections. The government, using different counting methods, says more than 21 million Americans, mostly in rural areas, don’t have access to fast internet.Either way, a lot of people are being left behind. In rural and suburban areas, people may have the choice of only a modern version of dial-up internet. In cities where fast internet is widespread, many lower-income people can’t afford it. Americans pay more for worse service than our counterparts in many affluent countries.How to get fast and affordable internet to everyone:Susan says the root of the problem is that big companies like AT&T and Comcast both control the internet pipelines and charge us to gain access to them. They don’t have an incentive to build affordable internet everywhere.What we need, Susan says, is a foundation of internet pipelines treated as a public good that will encourage competition for our internet dollars.She proposes the federal government give priority to local governments, nonprofits and other organizations with a public purpose to receive subsidies, tax breaks and low-cost loans for building fast and affordable internet connections.This seems like a government takeover of the internet.Susan doesn’t want the government to own internet lines. But she says our system doesn’t work, and the government has stepped in before to ensure essential services reach everyone at reasonable prices.Before the Great Depression, companies divided up the electrical grid from place to place, and mostly only businesses and rich people in cities had access to it. The government started providing loans and other help to municipal and rural power organizations. Electricity became ubiquitous.“We solved these problems in the past, but we keep forgetting,” Susan said. “We can do better as a country.”This won’t be easy.This is the kind of idea that only politicians who love big government will embrace. Former Vice President Joe Biden’s internet policy plan includes elements like what Susan proposes.Susan says the bill for a government-backed internet expansion would be larger than the $80 billion the Obama administration once estimated. (She believes investors other than the government would be involved.)The costs are worth it, she says. The issues that we care about — fair access to good education, renewable energy, effective health care and new technologies like driverless cars — all depend on having high-grade internet networks everywhere and for everyone.Brian X. Chen, our personal tech columnist, has advice if — OK, WHEN — you break one of your gadgets.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.While many of us are required to stay home, we will probably run into some sort of tech disaster. (I’m thinking about all the toilet phones out there.) Unfortunately, many gadget stores with repair centers, including Apple and Microsoft retail stores, are closed during the pandemic.So what to do? Our sister publication Wirecutter has a helpful guide, including tips on finding online support and locating electronics stores that are still open, like Best Buy.But here’s another nice idea: Try to support your independent repair technicians.There are probably phone and computer repair specialists in your area who would appreciate your business. Look them up with a quick Yelp or Google search, reach out to them and see if they can help. Ideally, they should be able to help you while keeping a safe distance.(Yesterday’s newsletter also talked about spending your precious dollars with local businesses.)Pack your virtual bags: The Times put together ways to explore from home the destinations in the list of 52 Places to Go in 2020. This video of a waterway trip through the Bolivian Amazon is almost like being there — kind of.An apple for teacher YouTube: YouTube channels for educational programs like Amoeba Sisters and Khan Academy are seeing huge demand from children (and their parents) eager for stand-in educators and entertainers. Bloomberg News reported that daily views of YouTube clips with “home school” in the title more than doubled in the past month.Hmm. Llama or piggy? For less than $100, a Bay Area animal sanctuary will let one of its llamas, goats, pigs, turkeys or other farm animals make a virtual appearance in your online-video happy hour or staff meeting, Business Insider reported.This TikTok video is a visual masterpiece combining the beauty of pie baking with the horrible anxiety of pandemic life.You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.