When Silly Start-Ups Falter, We All Lose
By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.It feels like the world is burning, doesn’t it? It’s hard to care about the struggles of silly scooter start-ups.Some young tech companies are being crushed as customers shelter at home during the coronavirus pandemic, and they’re laying off workers at lightning speed, as my colleague Erin Griffith writes. This can be devastating to people who work at start-ups, although the layoffs are a small number compared with the speed and scale of America’s job losses. For the rest of us, these start-ups matter in ways that we can’t always see. Many of us have come to rely on what these companies provide. There is an economy of homeowners and others who rely on income from Airbnb. And even if you never take an Uber ride, have groceries delivered by Instacart or eat burritos brought by DoorDash, the start-ups’ existence has made transportation authorities, supermarkets and restaurants bend to our needs. We also risk losing a can-do spirit. I tend to roll my eyes at the rah-rah of start-ups that say they’re trying to change the world. These are for-profit companies, not cancer-curing charities. But in my cold heart, I know that behind every start-up is (usually) a noble idea: What if there’s a better way?Navigating around cities, buying a home, finding reputable child care, running payroll for your business and feeding your family could be better, more efficient, more joyful. Along with the good ideas, there were reckless, exploitative and trivial ones — how many leggings companies do we need? But for the last decade there has been encouragement and cash for people who said they could find a better way. When start-up boom times turn to doomsday, as Erin chronicled, both clunkers and promising ideas may not have a shot. (Although this could be a breakthrough moment for remote work, school and fitness technologies.)I get it. We have more pressing things to worry about right now than frivolous start-ups. But when they falter, we all lose something. You and I have been reprogrammed to think, “Why does it have to be this way?” That nagging question will outlast some of the young companies that inspired it.If you were laid off from a tech start-up and want to share your experience, contact us at ontech@nytimes.com. A reporter may get in touch with you.There is an understandable desire right now for technological fixes for a global health crisis. We want tech to track people who might be exposed to the coronavirus, help hospitals manage a crush of patients and tell us if our symptoms are serious. These are good ideas — with potentially serious trade-offs. But what if they don’t even work?This 2014 research paper, recommended by my colleague Jennifer Valentino-DeVries, is a reminder of the limits of fighting a virus with technology. Google Flu Trends, which collected billions of illness-related web search terms to spot outbreaks early and consistently, sometimes wildly got the numbers wrong. The authors’ conclusions were that data gleaned from technology can supplement but not replace traditional flu-tracking methods like reports from doctors on influenza-like symptoms they were seeing. (There’s a new, follow-up research paper here.)Data we generate online and from our phones can be useful — including now for economists using Google searches to forecast the number of unemployed Americans. Even this data has limits. Tech isn’t a silver bullet. In a health crisis, a website will not create ventilators out of thin air or replace effective leadership.Greg Bensinger, a member of The Times editorial board, said our reliance right now on big companies like Amazon and Walmart should not override questions about whether they mistreat workers or unfairly muscle out rivals. Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Forced by the pandemic to drop in-person performances for online ones, classical music has become more accessible and charming, writes The Times’s Joshua Barone. (But Peter Gelb, the general manager of the Metropolitan Opera, says webcasts are a pale imitation of live performances.)Frank Bruni, the Times Opinion columnist, is in Gelb’s camp about the limits of online activities, including the use of emoticons and emojis. “There’s not a one of them, no matter how colorful, that has the melting warmth of a flesh-and-blood smile that’s happening right in front of me.” A pandemic is the perfect time! To become bakers, or fitness buffs! Everyone online seems to be using enforced at-home time to become more productive. But truly, it’s fine if we just muddle through instead of trying to optimize our lives, says our internet culture writer Taylor Lorenz. I tried and failed to read a single page of a book last night. I’m not sorry. OK, but maybe we can be a teeny bit productive? Here’s a helpful, manageable task: Digitize your important paper documents and mementos, like birth certificates and family photos. My colleague J.D. Biersdorfer walks you through how to do this.The video-meeting app Zoom has become a fixture of quarantine life, which makes it a target for horrible people to break into calls and harass others. One fix the company can make is to change settings, as it has done for schools, to not let people share what’s on their screen without the host’s permission, and to require the host to approve any attendees. Consumer Reports also has a good guide to the information Zoom collects on people using its app. The company said it turned off a data-gathering feature after my Times colleagues asked about it.May I present: the celebrity chef Ina Garten and a martini glass the size of a toddler. She posted this video Wednesday, before 10 a.m. (Thanks to the Briefings writer Melina Delkic for showing me this gem.)