One of Amazon’s Most Powerful Critics Lives in Its Backyard
By David McCabeWASHINGTON — Representative Pramila Jayapal was walking a fine line when she arrived at Amazon’s Seattle headquarters on a chilly day last October to meet with some of the company’s top executives.A liberal Democrat, Ms. Jayapal wanted to raise concerns about Amazon’s dominance and treatment of its workers. But her district, which includes much of Seattle, is home to many white-collar Amazon employees who may be unsympathetic to attacks on the company.She hoped to address her concerns privately. As the hours wore on, though, Ms. Jayapal felt she was getting nowhere, she said in her first extended interview about her relationship with Amazon. She would raise a concern, only to be told by the executives that there was no truth to the stories that had been reported.Now, after months of rising frustration with the company, she is taking her concerns public. “I try to have these discussions,” she said, “but I’m at the end of the private line.”Ms. Jayapal’s changing approach reflects the increasing criticism of Amazon. On Friday, she joined a bipartisan group of lawmakers who called for Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive, to testify before Congress. A big part of the reason they want to hear from him are concerns that an Amazon lawyer may have misled Ms. Jayapal during a hearing last summer.Many progressives like Ms. Jayapal argue that the internet giant exploits workers and abuses its market power. Those criticisms have become louder during the coronavirus pandemic, which has made the public more dependent on Amazon’s store and put the workers who keep it humming under intense pressure.But no other national elected official with Ms. Jayapal’s liberal politics has a district filled with Amazon’s corporate employees, who could be skeptical of her criticism but have become increasingly concerned about the company’s treatment of workers in its supply chain.“Two things can be true at the same time,” Ms. Jayapal said. “A company can be doing tremendous work that is incredibly valued and essential, and it can be treating workers badly.”Drew Herdener, an Amazon spokesman, disputed in a statement that Ms. Jayapal had engaged in good faith with the company.“We have tried to build a constructive relationship with Representative Jayapal, but that has proven difficult given her seeming lack of interest in getting to know our company and the facts,” Mr. Herdener said. “For example, she claims to have concerns about employee safety, yet she’s declined our invitation to visit a fulfillment center to see for herself, and chose instead to attack us in the media.”Ms. Jayapal, 54, was elected to the House in 2016 after a stint as a state legislator and a career as an activist, jobs that had put her at odds with some of the major companies that call Seattle home.“When I came in, I made a round of calls to everybody, and I said, ‘Look, I know we haven’t always seen eye to eye, but I represent the district and you’re an employer in the district, and I want to hear what you have to say,’” she said.She rose to become a co-chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus and a prominent voice on the national left.These days, Ms. Jayapal is hunkered down with her family in Seattle when she’s not in the nation’s capital. The pandemic, she said, has made them more reliant on home deliveries, like groceries from a Seattle food cooperative that works with Instacart. They maintain an Amazon Prime membership for the occasional household purchase.“I do feel some heartburn around inconsistency here with my frustrations around the things I’m seeing with some of the workers and then the fact that I’m using the service,” Ms. Jayapal said.She said she had been “careful” about how she handled her criticism of Amazon. She said she thought she had “a responsibility to the people who work for Amazon, because they are my constituents, and a responsibility to the company to make sure that I’m trying to engage in a dialogue at least before making judgments.”But by last fall, she had become more exasperated, Ms. Jayapal said. After she asked the company for a meeting, her office said, Amazon sent a handful of people, including David Zapolsky, its general counsel.The conversation became “tense,” Ms. Jayapal said, when she outlined her concerns about worker safety and other issues, including a report from an undercover journalist in Britain that employees had been urinating in water bottles because the warehouses had limited bathrooms.“I was getting really just a denial, almost, that any of these things were true, that any of these reports were true,” she said. She said the Amazon executives had suggested “that there are people who are out to get us.”Amazon said it had hoped to use the meeting to build a relationship with Ms. Jayapal, describing Mr. Zapolsky as a progressive leader. The company said Ms. Jayapal had been especially focused on the British report, which it said was not true.Not long after, Amazon started backing City Council candidates who opposed Seattle’s most liberal legislators. Ms. Jayapal publicly rebuked the company for getting involved in the campaigns.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Her concerns grew as she spoke with some Amazon workers about conditions in the warehouses, she said.Among them was Maren Costa, a principal user experience designer at Amazon who was pressuring the company to address climate change and improve working conditions in its warehouses. Not long after Ms. Costa spoke with Ms. Jayapal last month, she and another internal activist were fired.The workers argued that the firings were retaliation for their criticism. Amazon has said they had violated company policies; they said they had been told that they broke a rule against solicitation by asking fellow employees to sign a petition asking for better conditions in the warehouses.Ms. Costa said she and her fellow activists were “extremely heartened by the outpouring of support from elected officials and labor leaders,” including Ms. Jayapal.Ms. Jayapal’s concerns were heightened in late April when The Wall Street Journal reported that Amazon employees had consulted data from individual sellers on Amazon’s platform in deciding whether to produce some private-label products. It raised questions about whether an Amazon lawyer truthfully answered a question about the data that Ms. Jayapal asked at a congressional hearing last year.Ms. Jayapal said she was troubled by “the fact that they may have lied to me.” She said she had discussed referring the Amazon lawyer for a criminal perjury investigation, among other options, with leaders of the House Judiciary Committee’s antitrust investigation into Amazon and other large tech companies.“It’s simply incorrect to say that Amazon was intentionally misleading in our testimony,” said Mr. Herdener, the Amazon spokesman. “While we don’t believe these claims made by The Wall Street Journal are accurate, we take these allegations very seriously and have launched an internal investigation.”Ms. Jayapal sent Mr. Bezos a letter outlining her concerns with the company the day after the Journal article appeared online. She suggested that the company provide hazard pay for workers and give them more information about its coronavirus response. A week later, she and her colleagues demanded his public testimony.Asked what she would tell a constituent who worked for Amazon about her decision to take on the company directly, Ms. Jayapal offered this:“We are grateful for your work,” she said. “And this isn’t about you. It is about how the management of Amazon and the corporation as a whole treats all of its workers.”