Is ‘Death Diving’ the Future of TV?
The pandemic has shown we’ll watch any garbage on TV.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.Stuck at home, we’ve gorged on Netflix and everything else on screens. Is there any turning back?I talked to my colleague Ed Lee, a sharp observer of media and entertainment, about how our pandemic-driven habits might reshape television, sports and movies.He thinks his current love for an oddball “sport” shows we’re not picky about the quality of entertainment. And, he suggests we should get ready to hit the movie theater without leaving home.Shira: What’s surprising about people’s entertainment habits in this pandemic?Ed: I was surprised the lack of sports hasn’t significantly reduced TV watching. People are still tuning into live TV, mostly for news — but also for old sports or weird sports. I caught something called “death diving” on ESPN. It’s big in Norway, apparently. I’m hooked.WHAT IS DEATH DIVING?It’s a version of belly flopping, but a big part of it is performative — the things you do midair before you flop into the pool. I guess coronavirus is great for fringe sports.But we’re not going to watch marble racing and goofball diving on TV forever. (I think?)True. Most of this fringe content will be forgotten, but what it tells me is distribution is still kinda king. We’ll watch almost anything as long as there’s an “on” switch.The quality of entertainment doesn’t matter? Isn’t that discouraging?Remember when TV used to be only broadcast, everyone complained there was nothing good on, but we all still watched? Now, arguably, there’s plenty of good stuff on television. But it’s about which company can capture the most eyeballs to shove whatever they have at you.What’s going to happen with sports, which rely on TV money? If sports will be weird for a while, why pay a zillion dollars to football leagues?It’s like an arms race. If one TV company doesn’t pay up for a major sports franchise like the NFL, someone else will. The only way the arms race potentially ends is if younger people never develop a taste for live sports. That’s possible. Look at Twitch.There’s a lot of discussion about letting people watch new movies at home instead of in theaters. Will that happen?Yes, there’s a higher likelihood of some — emphasize some — films being released for home streaming instead of in theaters. Blockbusters like Marvel movies will still have theatrical releases.Do people want this? If I watch a movie at home, it doesn’t feel like an activity.Not everyone. But for some, the comfort and ease of doing so … yes!! People have been willing to pay as much as $50 to watch a new movie at home.Besides death diving, what’s your household’s pandemic entertainment?We’ve been watching “Never Have I Ever” on Netflix, and the latest season of “Killing Eve.” I’ve kept up with “Westworld” on HBO, but my heart isn’t in it. I’m just watching it to watch it. The “on” switch.Get this newsletter in your inbox every weekday; please sign up here.After I wrote this week about the future of online shopping, a couple of readers pushed back on the idea that more neighborhood package hubs would mean more traffic and pollution. Wouldn’t deliveries dropped off to everyone pollute less than all of us driving to stores?Yes, in principle, but probably not in practice.Anne Goodchild, a professor at the University of Washington, has found that consolidating deliveries in one area produces fewer climate-harming emissions than the same people driving back and forth to multiple stores.But Dr. Goodchild said that’s not a fair comparison because it’s not the reality of online shopping in the United States. Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.As more companies offer to ship online orders in one or two days, people are ordering more often. That tends to increase the number of times airplanes and trucks have to head out, and increases delivery miles traveled.In January to June of last year, 94 percent of Amazon orders were for only one item, according to Rakuten Intelligence, which asks people’s permission to analyze their email receipts. Speedy deliveries also require more airplanes, and compel companies to send out half-empty delivery vans.E-commerce companies will likely become more efficient at bunching deliveries and plotting transportation routes, but it won’t solve everything.Dr. Goodchild said the best practice for the environment is for people to buy less stuff in general, and for shipping times to be slower.“There’s Zoomd, Zoomi, Zumi, Zoomy, Zoomies, Zoomin, Zoomvy, Zoomly and Zoomph.” Other than this WONDERFUL newsletter, you will read nothing better than my colleague Erin Griffith’s Dr. Seuss-like tale of tech company names that suggest speed.Your regular reminder to be suspicious of what you see online: The “Plandemic” video that was everywhere online was initially a coordinated effort by people who oppose vaccines. They’re trying to capitalize on our coronavirus fears to spread discredited conspiracy theories, NBC News reported. Facebook and YouTube said they were deleting the video from their sites, but versions of it are still popping up.The dumb jokes are coming for you: The conspiracists (see above) and the money-minded people always figure out how to game popular online hangouts to get attention. My colleague Taylor Lorenz writes about the bombardment of TikTok, mostly known for its dance crazes and skits, by financially minded networks that create visual jokes known as memes.Staring at the planet Mercury is weirdly calming. Also, it’s science, so you can feel good about watching an internet video.We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.