A Privacy Absolutist Isn’t So Sure Anymore
The urgency of the pandemic has made Charlie Warzel, an Opinion writer for The Times, question his beliefs on the dangers of location tracking.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.Charlie Warzel, an Opinion writer for The New York Times, had been incensed about the smartphone apps that track our paths through the world.Then, he said, the urgency of the pandemic made him question his beliefs.In a conference call this week with readers, Charlie talked about his conflicting views on technology right now, and why he thinks health experts should be more upfront about what they don’t know. (Charlie’s dogs also butted into the call.)These are edited excerpts from the conversation. You can also listen to the recording here.Shira: What do you think about using technology to track people infected with the coronavirus?Charlie: In working on the Privacy Project, it became clear to me that being surveilled all the time by private companies was an absolute violation of our rights. But when I first heard about location tracking for this pandemic, I thought, “We need to understand where everyone is at a given time so we can contain this.”Honestly, I am taken aback by how my principles were undermined immediately by fears for my own safety. I’m still conflicted. I do think, though, that Bluetooth contact tracing for disease is a far better use of surveillance than, say, targeted advertising.What do you think about Apple and Google’s location-tracking blueprint to help health care authorities?These massive companies have the infrastructure and resources to do this. And there’s this feeling of almost, “Thank God someone’s stepping up.” They’re trying to engineer this in a very privacy-focused way.At the same time, I fear the consolidation of power of companies that already have huge amounts of it.Edri Geiger, a reader in Washington, asks: What can we do to protect children’s privacy with many schools holding classes online?There are guides, including from the Privacy Project and the Wirecutter, about how to download a VPN, virtual private network, which can offer some protection. You can also turn off location tracking on your phone.But we all live online at the moment. The only way we’re going to see real change is to put pressure on companies like Zoom to fortify their products.How can the authorities inform the public when knowledge about the pandemic keeps shifting?It puts the press, experts and political figures in complicated situations. The best example is the guidance from the C.D.C. and the W.H.O. about wearing face masks. They pushed the view that people don’t need them. And then conventional wisdom shifted.Some of the best experts are now communicating what they don’t know upfront. I wrote a column that was a list of things we don’t know. Stating the “known unknowns” is an exercise in humility for the press and for experts that will ultimately lead to more trust.I hear barking. Which dog was that?It was both Peggy and Steve. They don’t like the spotlight to be off them for too long.Shopping on Amazon always worked so well. It sold just about everything imaginable. It was easy to use, and packages showed up at our door reliably.But Amazon doesn’t just work anymore.It hasn’t been able to keep up with a spike of orders from people stuck at home. Amazon’s endless product bounty is no more. Good luck finding Bounty. Shifting delivery times and out-of-stock items are confusing shoppers, my colleague Karen Weise reported.Karen reported that Amazon is trying tricks to get people to order less — like showing long delivery times on items deemed low priority, to give Amazon more flexibility to fulfill orders and tamp down demand.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.I cannot express how profoundly un-Amazon it is for this company to turn away business.What I wonder is whether the company’s struggles will permanently shake people’s belief that Amazon just works.How has your experience been with Amazon in the past few weeks? Have you tried shopping online elsewhere? Please tell us about it at ontech@nytimes.com, and put shopping in the subject line.Required listening: My colleague Kevin Roose is the person I most want to hear from on how the internet is shaping our behavior and ideas. The first episodes of his new podcast series, Rabbit Hole, go deep into one young man’s radicalization on YouTube. I’ll have a conversation with Kevin in this newsletter on Monday.The boogeyman of conspiracies: Bill Gates, the Microsoft co-founder and philanthropist, has become a target online of false accusations that he created the coronavirus and wants to profit from it. Of all coronavirus misinformation, falsehoods about Gates are the most widespread, and they are amplified by prominent people including a son of Robert F. Kennedy, my Times colleagues report.May I just say: No, thanks. Courting through online video may become a permanent feature of dating, the boss of Match.com and Tinder told The Wall Street Journal.Balancing personal privacy and the public good: My colleagues Norimitsu Onishi and Constant Méheut explore whether France’s love of individual liberty can mesh with growing demands for digital tracking to fight the coronavirus.This is the plot: She developed “pulmonary gold disease” from her golden prosthetic arm, and things GOT WEIRD. Here are people giggling through this intentionally (???) campy horror series. I refuse to name this show, but it’s so bad/good I forgot about everything.We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.