Start-Ups Jump the Gun on Home Kits for Coronavirus Testing
By Natasha SingerLast week, two high-profile San Francisco health start-ups began marketing at-home coronavirus kits that let people collect their own saliva samples or oral throat swabs and then send the specimens to commercial labs to be tested for the virus.The start-ups, Carbon Health and Nurx, each said they were preparing to offer thousands of the kits in the coming weeks. By Friday afternoon, the Nurx site said its kits had “reached capacity for today” and promised more would be available for sale this week.But on Friday evening, the Food and Drug Administration issued an alert warning consumers that it had “not authorized any test” for the coronavirus that people could buy and administer at home. Carbon Health and Nurx subsequently suspended sales of their kits.As the coronavirus pandemic intensified across the country, the two companies and other start-ups rushed to market collect-your-own specimen kits without rigorous published studies proving the effectiveness of at-home swabbing for coronavirus testing.The dash to sell at-home kits coincided with a push by the White House to promote rapid innovation in coronavirus testing by relaxing federal health regulations. Last Wednesday, President Trump announced that his administration was studying the possibility of introducing self-swabbing on a mass scale — an effort that could free up health providers to focus more on treating seriously ill patients and less on collecting specimens. Then on Monday, the White House appeared to overrule the F.D.A., saying that “self-swabbing options” should be available to Americans this week.Tech giants and some of their top executives are also racing to help track the spread of the virus and rapidly increase testing. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation is sponsoring research at major medical centers on at-home kits.The studies are examining whether swabbing inside your nostrils with a short Q-tip-like wand at home could work as well for coronavirus testing as the medical-grade specimens that health professionals collect — an often uncomfortable process that involves pushing a long swab up through the nose to collect samples from the back of a patient’s throat.“There are significant differences between these collection methods,” Dr. Dan Wattendorf, director of innovative technology solutions at the Gates Foundation, said in recent comments on the foundation’s site. “So it’s essential for the F.D.A. to evaluate their relative performance through rigorous, well-designed studies.”The Gates Foundation and others are optimistic that self-collected swabs might prove effective for the coronavirus. The hope is that the kits could help stem the pandemic by enabling millions of people who are carrying the virus to safely collect their own testing samples without going to doctors’ offices, where they might infect health providers and other patients.The start-ups were not marketing a novel method of testing for infectious diseases. At-home kits have proved effective for other infections, such as gonorrhea.Founded in 2015, Nurx markets self-swabbing kits and online consultations for sexually transmitted diseases. The start-up, whose investors include the venture capital firms Kleiner Perkins and Union Square Ventures, said it had worked with Molecular Testing Labs, its longstanding diagnostic testing provider, to develop its coronavirus kits and was confident the tests were accurate.Executives at Carbon Health, which offers telemedicine consultations as well as in-person medical care at its own clinics, said it had decided to offer self-administered sampling kits after doctors there treated some of the first coronavirus patients in California and ran into obstacles getting them tested. It worked with Curative, a three-month-old start-up, to develop a saliva test for the virus.“Having a saliva sample that can be mailed back and that is just as accurate, or nearly as accurate, as the nasal or the throat swab was very attractive to us,” said Dr. Caesar Djavaherian, the medical director of Carbon Health.Another San Francisco start-up, Forward, which runs health care clinics using a health-club-like membership model, announced last week that it was offering self-swabbing kits on a limited basis to members it determined to be at high risk for the virus. Forward’s investors include Joshua Kushner, the brother of Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s adviser and son-in-law.But public health and laboratory medicine experts cautioned that tests based on self-swabbing might not be accurate, noting that many of the at-home kits did not adhere to current medical standards of care.For coronavirus testing, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that health care professionals first and foremost collect nasopharyngeal samples — the ones involving the long swabs through the nose. Experts said that was because there was not yet enough effectiveness data available on testing other kinds of specimens for coronavirus.The Nurx kit uses oral swabs of the throat, the Forward kit uses inner-cheek swabs, and the Carbon Health kit uses saliva.“That sounds to me like a really terrible idea,” Dr. Sheldon Campbell, associate director of the Yale School of Medicine’s Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, said of collecting saliva samples at home. “There is concern, in this outbreak emergency setting, that good labs will cut corners and that bad labs will spring up to exploit the opportunity to make a quick buck.”Last month, the F.D.A. issued guidance for the pandemic allowing accredited commercial labs to develop and perform tests for the coronavirus — as long as they applied for an emergency use authorization from the agency within 15 days of initiating testing.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Carbon Health, Forward, Nurx and Everlywell, another start-up that promoted at-home kits, each said last week that they were working with accredited labs that had received the F.D.A. emergency authorization. They also said the labs met federal standards for demonstrating the accuracy of their coronavirus tests.But on Friday, the F.D.A. clarified that the coronavirus testing guidelines for accredited labs did not apply “to at-home testing, including self-collection of samples to be sent to a clinical laboratory.”The agency also noted that it saw the “public health value in expanding the availability” of safe and accurate coronavirus tests that may include home collection. “We are actively working with test developers in this space,” the agency said.Nurx and Forward said on Monday that they had suspended sales of their kits.In a statement, Carbon Health said it was discontinuing the at-home kits and contacting the 50 people who had used them to schedule testing in its clinics.Everlywell said it was moving to provide its kits, which use the long swabs for nasopharyngeal testing, to health care providers and hospitals.Researchers working on the Gates-sponsored nasal self-swabbing study said they hoped to have results soon showing the efficacy of at-home coronavirus kits. Among other things, the researchers are studying whether self-administered nostril swabs pick up sufficient cells to produce accurate results.“One of the things we are trying to figure out is, how accurate is this nasal test going to be?” said Dr. Yvonne Maldonado, a professor of pediatrics, health research and policy at Stanford University School of Medicine who specializes in infectious diseases. “If you are negative, how likely are you to be still infected?”