The Week in Tech: Coronavirus Disrupts the Industry
By Mike IsaacEach week, we review the week’s news, offering analysis about the most important developments in the tech industry.Hello there, loyal technology newsletter subscribers. It’s Mike Isaac, tech correspondent for The New York Times, bringing you this week’s news digest. Let’s dive right into it.The biggest story of the moment is the rapid spread of the coronavirus, which can cause a potentially fatal flulike illness and originated in China. The virus — and the global attempts to contain it — has rocked the business world, sending financial markets into correction territory, down more than 10 percent.In the tech industry, companies with direct exposure to China were the earliest to feel the effects. Apple, for instance, warned investors that the supply of iPhones — the company’s marquee product, which accounts for the bulk of its revenue every quarter — would be hampered by the spread of the coronavirus. Apple relies heavily on factories in Shenzhen, China, and Chinese consumers are an enormous segment of the company’s customer base.Days later, Microsoft rang the alarm bell. The tech giant depends on customers who install its Windows software on laptops and Surface tablets, and both of those hardware products are also being hammered by closings and slowdowns in China. Personal computing accounts for roughly a third of Microsoft’s revenue.While hardware companies seem to be the most obvious candidates to face trouble, the impact is starting to ripple outward to other, less obvious internet companies.Expedia, the travel aggregator, declined to provide a full-year financial outlook because of the coronavirus’ disruption of travel. Companies like Didi, the Chinese ride-hailing giant, have started providing drivers with plastic barriers to place between the front and back seats, offering another layer of protection from the virus.Dun & Bradstreet, the business research firm, said about 51,000 companies had one or more suppliers in regions of China affected by the virus, almost certainly leading to a broader impact in the months ahead.To try to keep their employees safe, some companies are taking preventive measures. Organizers called off MWC Barcelona, the annual global telecommunications trade show in Spain. But the giant RSA security conference still went on in San Francisco this past week, even though big companies like IBM, AT&T and Verizon pulled out of it.Facebook canceled one of its advertising events, which is attended largely by employees, and its annual F8 conference — one of the company’s most anticipated events. That’s where it showcases its products and plans for the future to software developers. Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive, is a mainstay at the event, giving a regular state-of-the-industry keynote address.Karen Weise, my colleague in Seattle, had this tidbit to share: Employees at Amazon’s worldwide operations — the company’s largest division, which runs the technology and operations for warehouses, deliveries, Prime membership and physical stores, among other things — were told that they should not travel domestically or internationally “until further notice,” according to emails viewed by The New York Times.Dave Clark, the senior vice president who runs worldwide operations, wrote in one of the emails that no group or team meetings requiring travel should be planned until at least the end of April, “by which time hopefully we have a better sense of the virus, its spread and impact.”Amazon confirmed that Mr. Clark had emailed his organization on the matter. “We are watching this situation closely with a focus on the safety of our teams and ensuring we can meet customer promises,” an Amazon spokeswoman, Kelly Cheeseman, said in a statement. “We are closely following local and international health authority guidance as this situation progresses.”The company had already been scrambling to make sure it doesn’t run out of popular products that are made in China, and has urgently emailed suppliers to see if they expect to have enough of their best sellers for its all-important Prime Day this summer.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Rather than forecasting the apocalypse, I’ve been engaging in a different thought exercise over the past few weeks: What less obvious companies might the coronavirus affect in ways we hadn’t anticipated?Will Netflix, for example, see a drastic uptick in hours of streaming television watched, given people aren’t leaving their homes anymore? Or consider delivery companies like Uber Eats, DoorDash, Instacart, even Amazon. In a world where people are increasingly hesitant to go outside and mingle with others, will consumers start to rely more heavily on others doing the shopping for them?Investors seem to be doing the same: Shares in Zoom, the teleconferencing software company, skyrocketed over the past week as more white-collar workers telecommute from home.I find this Zoom anecdote highly relatable. I’ve sent my boss more Slack and G-chat messages in the past few weeks than I can remember ever sending before.Intuit, the tax-preparation and financial-data company, announced a $7.1 billion deal to buy Credit Karma, a major move into creating a financial-services and personal-data-collection behemoth. The idea is to serve as a kind of online financial assistant for people, our reporters Nathaniel Popper and Michael de la Merced wrote, helping consumers get their credit scores, file their taxes and find new loans and other financial products.Uber plans to start paying drivers to display advertising on digital signs mounted to the tops of their cars, because apparently not enough surfaces in the world contain advertising on them.LinkedIn is testing its own “Stories” product, hopping on the bandwagon of companies that have ripped off Snapchat’s pioneering way of showing disappearing status updates to friends and followers.Speaking of Expedia: The company slashed more than 3,000 jobs, about 12 percent of its work force. An internal email announcing the move said the cuts were due to Expedia’s history of pursuing growth in an “unhealthy and undisciplined” way.Bob Iger, the chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, abruptly stepped down, replacing himself with another Bob (Chapek, who ran the company’s entertainment theme parks division). Though Mr. Iger had long expressed his desire to leave the company, spectators immediately wondered what his next move would be. A Democratic vice-presidential pick, perhaps?And finally, if you somehow missed it, you absolutely have to read The Wall Street Journal’s corker of a story on the cutthroat squabbles at the top of SoftBank, the Japanese megaconglomerate, which has billions of dollars in investment spread throughout Silicon Valley and beyond. Having started making waves in the Valley years ago, SoftBank has fallen from grace in recent months after some of its highest-profile investments have turned out to be flops.How are we doing?We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bits_newsletter@nytimes.com.Like this email?