The Week in Tech: London Hands Washington a Loss on Huawei
By David McCabeEach week, we review the week’s news, offering analysis about the most important developments in the tech industry.Hi, this is David McCabe. I report on tech policy from The Times’s bureau in Washington. But this past week, one of the biggest stories began with an announcement an ocean away.For weeks, we had been waiting to see whether Prime Minister Boris Johnson would allow Huawei equipment to be used in Britain’s 5G wireless network or follow American officials in shutting the company out. The United States has said for years that the company’s networking gear could give the Chinese government access to key infrastructure.On Tuesday, Mr. Johnson revealed his decision: Huawei is in. The company’s equipment can be used in a portion of the 5G, or fifth-generation, network.This is a big setback for the Trump administration’s global anti-Huawei push. The White House had sent top officials to London to try to sway Mr. Johnson, a close ally. Shortly after the British announcement, the European Union told its members to limit but not totally eliminate Huawei’s role in their network.I messaged Adam Satariano, who covers tech in Europe from The Times’s London bureau, to find out more about the fallout from Mr. Johnson’s choice.Why did Boris Johnson make the decision to allow Huawei to stay involved in building Britain’s 5G network, despite all the pressure he was under from the Trump administration?There are a few key reasons. First, a practical one. Huawei has been part of the British telecom network for years. 5G will be built on top of that existing system. To implement a ban now would be extraordinarily costly and delay the rollout of the faster network because a lot of that old kit would have to be ripped out.Second, British intelligence and cybersecurity officials believe the risks of Huawei can be mitigated. As part of allowing Huawei to be part of its network, British officials years ago required the company to subject its products and code to tests. There’s a lab near Cambridge where this is done. For British officials, this gives them a level of confidence that the problem can be managed. Of course, American officials think this is wishful thinking. With 5G, software plays a much bigger role, meaning it will be harder to keep harmful code from slipping through.Finally, as Britain exits the European Union, it can’t afford to alienate China, which is a big investor in the country and a growing buyer of British exports. From an economic standpoint, it would be a big risk. Britain also sees 5G as a key to the country’s economic future, and any delays could put it at a disadvantage to other countries.Here in Washington, Mr. Johnson’s decision set off a paroxysm of concerned statements from the administration and hawkish members of Congress. What has the reaction been like in Britain?I think it was expected. The statement from the White House was actually quite mild. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo still went forward with a trip to Britain during the week. Perhaps harsher words were shared behind closed doors.This Huawei decision is also just one example of a split between how tech is regulated in the United States and in Britain. What’s the future of the special relationship when it comes to tech?Complicated. Like many countries in Europe, Britain is very frustrated with Big Tech. It doesn’t think the companies pay their fair share in taxes. And with Facebook and Google/YouTube, not enough is done to limit the spread of harmful content. Attempts to address taxes and harmful content will gain momentum this year, potentially setting up more tension with the United States.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.It’s late in London, so I’ve got just one more: You cover all of Europe, not just Britain. Where does the American campaign to keep Huawei out of 5G networks go next?Germany is another country where the United States has been applying a lot of pressure. But as our colleagues Katrin Bennhold and Jack Ewing recently reported, it also faces a tough decision. China has threatened to retaliate if Huawei is banned. That is not an insignificant threat for Germany, which sells a lot of BMWs and VWs to China. Chancellor Angela Merkel has signaled she doesn’t want a ban, but she is facing pressure from others in government who want to take a more aggressive approach.It’s a fascinating issue, touching on tech, trade, politics, foreign policy and national security.Three stories during the week underscored how the news around the coronavirus that originated in Wuhan, China — and the way the public has responded — is being mediated by online platforms.The Times’s Raymond Zhong reported from Shanghai on the way that anger over the Chinese government’s handling of the outbreak has boiled over on social media.Not surprisingly, the virus has also been the subject of online disinformation. BuzzFeed News’s Jane Lytvynenko had a good roundup, including posts with false statements about how many people are affected and the authorities’ response.But in The Atlantic, Alexis Madrigal noted that it was important to remember that while “out-and-out conspiracies and hoaxes will draw some attention, it’s really the stuff that’s close to the boundaries of discourse that grabs the most eyeballs.”Workers in Amazon or Walmart warehouses often sort through bins of random objects, looking for the right one to send off for packaging and delivery to consumers. Now, the robots are catching up, Adam Satariano and Cade Metz reported.Eduardo Porter filed an article from Portland, Maine, where local officials and a wealthy donor are hoping to build out a greater tech presence.Facebook reported its lowest quarterly growth ever.Lyft is restructuring and will lay off about 90 employees.Apple’s profit grew 11.4 percent to $22.3 billion, thanks to stronger iPhone, wearable and services revenue.We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bits_newsletter@nytimes.com.