Alphabet’s Profit Is Up, but Company Warns of Difficulties
By Daisuke WakabayashiOAKLAND, Calif. — Until the coronavirus took hold in the United States, Google’s parent company, Alphabet, was marching forward to another predictably strong quarter.Calling it a “tale of two quarters,” Sundar Pichai, Alphabet’s chief executive, said on Tuesday that the company had been doing well in January and February until a “significant and sudden slowdown” in advertising revenue in March.The result was a quarter that fell short of Alphabet’s usually stellar results but still exceeded Wall Street’s revenue expectations. Revenue rose 13 percent to $42.1 billion from a year earlier, and net income edged up 3 percent to $6.8 billion, Alphabet said.On a conference call with analysts, Mr. Pichai said the company planned to be “thoughtful” about spending in the short term. He said Alphabet planned to slow hiring, while adjusting investments in areas like data centers and machine learning and curbing costs for travel and marketing.Alphabet also plans to reduce its investments in office buildings, halting most of its new construction and acquiring new commercial real estate at a slower pace.Ruth Porat, Alphabet’s chief financial officer, warned that “the second quarter will be a difficult one for our advertising business” and said the company no longer expected that its work force would grow more than 20 percent in 2020, as it had predicted in January.In the quarter that just ended, Alphabet hired more than 4,000 employees, bringing its total 123,000.The pandemic has all but eliminated ads from one of Google’s biggest categories of advertisers: travel booking. Advertisers like Booking Holdings, the parent company of Kayak, Priceline and Booking.com, and Expedia have said they plan to slash the billions of dollars they spend on Google annually as travel has ground to halt.Despite the advertising slowdown at Google, Alphabet is still better positioned than most peers. Its shares were up 7 percent in after-hours trading on Tuesday.Alphabet owns some of the most visited websites on the internet, including YouTube, and search advertising will remain important to marketers because those paid links translate into new business.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Revenue from search ads increased 9 percent to $24.5 billion, while YouTube ad spending increased 33 percent to $4 billion, Alphabet said.Company executives said users were flocking to Google and YouTube during the crisis. While that might not translate directly into greater revenue, it bodes well for when advertisers are more inclined to spend, the executives said.