The Week in Tech: Welcome to the Age of Mandatory Videoconferencing
By Sheera FrenkelEach week, we review the week’s news, offering analysis about the most important developments in the tech industry.Hey there, newsletter subscribers. I’m Sheera Frenkel, cybersecurity reporter for The New York Times, bringing you the week’s tech news.I’m writing this from my home office, after every tech source I was scheduled to meet during the week canceled, citing fear of contracting the coronavirus.Instead of meeting in person, I’m speaking to people using a half-dozen different messaging services, online conference portals and video chat platforms. That tech is making it possible for thousands of workers across Silicon Valley to go on with their day-to-day jobs while taking precautions against the virus outbreak.The coronavirus seems to be having an effect on all aspects of the tech industry, from social media policies around health misinformation to the way the big companies do business.Twitter, LinkedIn and Microsoft have asked their employees to work from home, if possible. Together, the three companies employ more than 75,000 people in the United States.Other companies are taking a more piecemeal approach. Google instructed employees at its Dublin office to work from home, after one person there possibly came into contact with the virus. Facebook’s employees in China are working from home, and the company has pulled out of several conferences and canceled appearances by its top executives at public events.A number of companies, including Amazon and Apple, have asked employees to cancel nonessential travel to and from China. They have also restricted visitors to their offices, and asked employees who exhibit any sign of illness to stay home until they are screened for the coronavirus.Tech companies in the service industry have scrambled to come up with policies on how to keep their work force and customers safe.Uber and Lyft have seen an uptick in business, as people afraid of using public transportation rely more on hailing rides. It’s unclear, however, how much guidance the two companies are offering their armies of contract workers on how to stay safe. Uber has asked drivers to wash their hands, while Lyft pointed drivers to the recommendations made by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Airbnb told hosts and guests affected by the coronavirus outbreak that they could cancel reservations without incurring a charge. So did TaskRabbit.Business has boomed for companies that offer services to help people conduct meetings online, such as Zoom and BlueJeans.Google announced that it was giving G Suite customers free access to the suite’s advanced features. These include the ability to hold virtual meetings with hundreds of participants, or stream live events to tens of thousands of people. Microsoft also announced that it was offering six-month free trials of Teams, a product to help employees video chat with one another.Social media companies began an aggressive response to misinformation related to the coronavirus.Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, outlined what his company was doing in a long post. He said Facebook was working closely with government groups like the World Health Organization. Any search for “coronavirus” on Facebook immediately directs people to the W.H.O. or local health authorities. Facebook has also pledged to give the W.H.O. unlimited free ads to share information about the coronavirus.In addition, Facebook is removing misinformation about the coronavirus from its platform and Instagram, which it owns.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.YouTube is also linking to the W.H.O. on the top of search results for the coronavirus. While videos spreading conspiracy theories on the coronavirus could still be found, they did not appear in the first page of search results for YouTube.Twitter said in a blog post on Thursday that it was working to prevent the spread of misinformation about the virus on its platform. The company also said it was expanding its policies on “dehumanizing speech” to include tweets that disparage those who have contracted the coronavirus. Previously, the policy applied only to tweets that dehumanized people because of their religion.“It just so happens to be that we’re having this issue right now with the coronavirus,“ said Jerrel Peterson, who leads Twitter’s global safety policy team. “Whenever something happens in the world, people come to Twitter to talk about it. We are seeing lots of conversations about it.”All of the social media companies are sure to be challenged as more cases of the coronavirus are reported across the United States.The race to be the Democratic nominee for president has come down to two main candidates: Senator Bernie Sanders and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. My colleagues Nellie Bowles and Erin Griffith took a look at the disparity between Silicon Valley tech leaders, who have been imploring Democrats to reject Mr. Sanders, and their employees.Can YouTube quiet its conspiracy theorists? That was the provocative question asked by Jack Nicas as he described a new study from researchers at the University of California, Berkeley. The study, which looked at eight million recommendations over 15 months, “provides one of the clearest pictures yet of that fight,” he wrote, “and the mixed findings show how challenging the issue remains for tech companies like Google, Facebook and Twitter.”Nathaniel Popper looked at a different study, just in case you ever wanted to know if you could hire a hit man on the dark web. According to Nathaniel: “Don’t expect someone to get the job done. Experts and law enforcers who have studied these sites — almost all of them on the so-called dark web or dark net — say they are scams. There has not been a known murder attributed to any of them.” I guess that’s a relief?And finally, we return to coronavirus. If fear of the virus is keeping you at home, and you want to order food via a delivery app, know that it comes at a price. My colleague Brian Chen found that ordering through an app could be up to 91 percent more expensive. Ordering through an app means paying multiple parties, including the driver, the app and the restaurant itself. That can really add up.How are we doing?We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bits_newsletter@nytimes.com.Like this email?