It’s Now Amazon’s Turn in the Spotlight
The tech superpower faces hard questions over how it’s handling worker safety.By Shira OvideI’ll be chatting live on Twitter today at 3 p.m. Eastern time with Kara Swisher, a Times contributing opinion writer and a veteran technology journalist.We’ll talk about how our relationship with technology and tech companies is changing in a pandemic, and answer your questions. Watch live @ShiraOvide.With millions of people stuck at home, many are relying on Amazon deliveries more than ever. But each order increases the health risks for the people who sort, package and deliver those goods.The Times tech reporters Karen Weise and Kate Conger detailed the resulting dilemma: The company says it is doing everything it can to protect those workers by separating workstations, sanitizing warehouses, giving people more time off and increasing pay to counter the higher risks.And yet some of those workers say the company isn’t doing enough, hasn’t made good on its promises or isn’t upfront with them about safety risks.Other kinds of workers — doctors and home health aides, cleaners, grocery workers, postal employees — also have said their employers weren’t doing enough to protect them as they interact with others in a pandemic.Maybe Amazon is doing a better job than others. Maybe not. The reality is there is rightfully significant attention on Amazon because it’s a powerful company reshaping how the world shops and how industries operate.There are more than 50 Amazon facilities, out of the more than 500 it operates in the United States, in which at least one worker has tested positive for the coronavirus.In their reporting, my colleagues found some Amazon workers who were angry about what they felt was poor communication and shifting messages on issues like who qualifies for paid time off.At first Amazon said workers could get paid sick leave if they had a confirmed coronavirus case, but testing has been limited in the United States. Amazon changed its policy, but the message hasn’t filtered down to all warehouses, Karen and Kate found.There’s no blueprint for how to manage a global pandemic, but there was a pattern to surging Amazon orders and worker safety concerns as the coronavirus spread from country to country. Once illness hit the United States, it’s surprising that Amazon — known for its military-like distribution efficiency — has been caught off guard, including by a lack of trust from some workers.The feeling seems to be mutual. Last week a company memo reviewed by Vice News showed Amazon executives discussing strategies to discredit a worker who protested.This impasse with Amazon workers was born in a pandemic, but has been a long time coming. Mistrust takes time to build.Other American tech superpowers have faced a moment when existential problems flared into crisis. Facebook’s cavalier attitudes about online abuse and people’s personal information simmered until they boiled over. Employee anxiety at Google, and distrust of its political neutrality, were encapsulated in the circumstances of one fired worker.Now it’s Amazon’s turn in the spotlight.This article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.Brian X. Chen, our personal tech columnist, offers this guidance on Zoom:You may have heard that Zoom, the suddenly popular videoconferencing service, has been under fire for a number of privacy snafus. Security researchers, for example, recently found that malware could be injected into the Zoom app, allowing bad actors to gain control of your video camera; Zoom patched the exploit last week.But security researchers have warned that this is just the beginning of Zoom’s privacy problems. The broader issue is that to make Zoom calls easier for people to join, the company at the outset created a weak foundation for security. The company circumvented traditional protocols for installing its software on Windows and Mac computers, creating security holes.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.I’ll have more to say about Zoom soon. But here’s some practical advice for now, based on my conversations with experts. If you still want to use Zoom, it’s safer to use it on a mobile device, like an iPad or smartphone, instead of on a Mac or Windows PC.That’s because mobile apps operate in a so-called sandboxed environment, meaning that they are limited in how they interact with other apps and files on your device. This makes it much more difficult for bad actors to grab your sensitive data or hijack your camera.In addition, apps served through the App Store or Google Play store undergo a review process by Apple and Google that includes an inspection for security vulnerabilities.After we discussed with my colleague Kevin Roose last week why the pandemic seems to be bringing out the best in everyone online, we heard from Greg Herbert in Orlando, Florida:My 5th grader, whose school started doing Zoom classes and “distance learning” last week, made the comment at dinner this whole transition to doing things virtual/online was “bringing out the best in everyone.”When we asked him what he meant, he said, “The teachers aren’t yelling at us anymore!”The coronavirus is exposing inequality of digital access: Teachers at some schools across the United States say that fewer than half of their students are regularly participating in online classes. One problem in schools around the world is some families don’t have reliable internet access or computers at home. The longstanding gap between the internet have and have-nots is becoming stark as school closings amount to the world’s largest experiment in online learning.Running alone, but together. Virtual races — in which runners complete a route on their own and record their results to compare with others’— are getting more popular as quarantines force cancellations of the real thing. This is happening in other sports, too, even among professionals, as the BBC and The Verge report.Virtual social demands can still be exhausting. Relentless efforts to hang out online are creating “the bizarre feeling of being socially overwhelmed despite the fact that we’re staying as far away from each other as we can,” MIT Technology Review writes.Residents of a Buffalo, N.Y., neighborhood held a socially distant dance party where they danced on their lawns to the Rolling Stones. You go, man in the plaid shirt. You GO. (Thanks to my colleague Taylor Lorenz for this.)We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.