Passover Goes On, With Screens
Religious families lean on technology this month to recreate disrupted rituals.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.On a recent Tuesday morning at their usual time, more than a dozen women in New Jersey huddled with their rabbi — virtually. Like so many houses of worship, Highland Park Conservative Temple is closed.For people celebrating cherished holidays this month, the coronavirus outbreak is forcing them to balance the religious imperative to come together with the public health imperative to stay apart.Like others, the Highland Park congregation of nearly 400 families is leaning on technology to recreate the disrupted rituals of life as best they can.The big topic of the women’s meeting was how to manage Passover, which begins Wednesday evening. Some of the women, most of them older, worried about the risk of shopping for food that meets Passover guidelines.Rabbi Eliot Malomet was firm but compassionate about the necessity to avoid the typical Passover dinner, or Seder, packed with loved ones. Household-only or holiday gatherings through webcams would have to do this year.“We’re going to sit at the Seder and cry and get through this,” he said.The Highland Park temple has been holding online services, including a twice daily minyan, a gathering to recite prayers. Rabbi Malomet is planning a brief online greeting before the traditional Passover dinner.Rabbi Malomet had to overcome a few early missteps with virtual worship. The first day of minyan over Zoom — or “zoominyan,” as he called it — attendees created a racket, until he figured out he could mute everyone’s microphones.The rabbi also implemented new etiquette for virtual worship: No making breakfast during the 7 a.m. service, for example.(More in The Times: How to introduce some new characters — even emoji — to your socially distanced Seder.)Rabbi Malomet said connecting virtually is a poor substitute for in-person interaction, but he is trying to use technology to keep an eye on people who need help with practical or emotional needs.For many Jews, there’s no question that Passover would take place, even in altered form. There’s a long history of Jewish religious traditions practiced under dire circumstances.“We will be fine,” Rabbi Malomet said. “It will sting a little, and for people who have endured terrible loss it will be a lot, but we will get through this.”At the women’s meeting, normal interactions peeked through the coronavirus anxieties. There were congratulations for a woman whose grandson got engaged. The meeting was derailed when one participant set her video-call background to an image of the Golden Gate Bridge, and others tried to figure out how to do it, too.The women said they were glad to connect, even over webcams. “It’s lovely to see you all,” one said. “This will make my day.”Last week I wrote about how technology is not a silver bullet to predict disease. It can, of course, still be a useful tool.One of the odd and unsettling symptoms of Covid-19 — a loss of one’s sense of smell — might make it useful for spotting coronavirus flare-ups early.The New York Times contributing Opinion writer Seth Stephens-Davidowitz recently mapped Google searches related to loss of smell, and found they overlapped with coronavirus prevalence rates by state.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.This symptom is unusual in our typical illnesses. That makes our Doctor Google searches about it a possibly useful predictor of coronavirus hot spots in certain areas, David Lazer, a computational social scientist, told me recently. More research is needed to understand the link between search behavior and health status, he said.I wrote about 2014 research by Dr. Lazer and others that found Google search data failed to accurately spot seasonal flu outbreaks. The Google predictions were wildly off base — including a conclusion that searches related to high school basketball were flu predictors. (Like the flu, basketball season happens in winter.)One perennial challenge of researching illness through our internet searches is that habits change as we learn about symptoms and search for them more regularly. There are also demographic differences in search behavior.In his seasonal flu research, for example, Dr. Lazer said that men tended to be better predictors of seasonal flu trends than women. Men were less likely to search for personal health information in Google on a regular basis. When they were typing symptoms into Google, it was more likely that they were doing so while sick.How our online habits have changed in a pandemic: We’re not staring at our phones as much, or fanatically hunting through Wikipedia.The internet was (literally) designed to withstand a nuclear bomb: The Washington Post digs into the origins of the internet, which engineers and scientists developed during the Cold War to be resilient and not require anyone to be in charge.We are really not in control of our information. Really: The C.E.O. of a gay dating app has turned down dozens of offers to sell data on the location of people using his app, according to Protocol. It’s another reminder that all sorts of companies are hoarding information about us for commercial purposes, without our informed consent.Surgeons hosted a socially distanced cello and piano recital at a New York hospital on Monday. I felt better, for 40 seconds.We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.