Why Rural America’s Digital Divide Persists
The pandemic is making clear that rural Americans are left behind. Less clear is how to fix it.By Shira OvideThis article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.Bogus maps and broken bureaucracies can have real world harm.Cecilia Kang, a Times technology reporter, wrote Tuesday about a family living outside Ithaca, N.Y., that can’t get fast internet service at home — because government maps say the area already has access. Instead, members of the family, the Derrys, drive to a country market a couple miles away, sit in their car and hop on the store’s internet hot spot for Zoom classes and to send work emails. Cecilia explained to me why tens of millions of Americans in rural areas aren’t getting fast internet at home, and how the pandemic has made politicians agree on the problems of the online access gap — but not on solutions.Shira: Why can’t the Derry family access internet service at home?Cecilia: If your census area has one home with fast internet service, the government logs everyone else as having access, too, even if they don’t. The Derrys only are able to buy internet service that’s a throwback to the early 2000s, but one of their neighbors has the option of fast internet service. The government’s national broadband map is flawed and relieves pressure on internet providers to service families like the Derrys. Louis Derry says he has been complaining about this to the state for years.Whose fault is this?The internet providers are overreporting where their service reaches, and the Federal Communications Commission has allowed them to get away with it for years. Poor management of the Universal Service Fund, which subsidizes phone and internet access in rural areas, also has meant some companies get the money without delivering on the promised numbers of households served or service quality.OK, play policy maker: What would fix this problem?More accountability in the U.S.F. program is a good first step, and arguably it needs more funding. There’s a debate in Congress over whether coronavirus-related stimulus programs are an opportunity to solve rural internet gaps. With schools closed and more people working from home, Democrats and Republicans both generally agree now with the principle of getting fast internet to every American. They disagree on how.What are their differences?It’s the classic big government versus small government debate. Democrats say more government funding to bring internet service to people like the Derry family can create the kind of jobs the economy will need. Republicans are backing a new mobile internet technology to replace home internet lines and solve access gaps. There were similar arguments about electricity and phone service in the early 1900s. Then, the federal government decided those services were essential, and it brought electric and telephone poles to every home, no matter the cost. The telecommunications companies will not serve the Derry family out of the goodness of their heart. There needs to be a financial incentive.What has changed since you wrote about gaps in internet access in 2016?The digital divide during the pandemic is changing the minds of those who didn’t think this was a real problem. I think the stories of students being left behind because they can’t connect to virtual classes will be heartbreaking and propel the internet companies and Washington to act. Here’s hoping …We want to hear from our readers who don’t have fast and reliable internet at home. How has this affected you? How do you and your family manage? Tell us at ontech@nytimes.com; please include your full name and location. We may publish a selection of responses.We have to be suspicious about the motivations behind everything we see online.That was the extremely discouraging message from the Times tech reporter Davey Alba, who writes about the nasty corners of the internet.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.She and Sheera Frenkel traced the online spread of misinformation that started with President Trump’s mention that disinfectants and ultraviolet light might help people infected with the coronavirus. His supporters shared videos or posts that they said supported the president’s remarks, and hucksters also seized on his comments to promote their unproven or dangerous “cures.”This is a now familiar pattern. Information is almost never neutral. People share online the ideas that conform to their political views, and people who have something to sell use tantalizing information as a business opportunity. The big internet companies like YouTube and Facebook have a tough time making and enforcing rules about what posts or videos are harmful. It’s a mess. And there’s no way to fix it other than becoming more aware of the mess.“We all have a responsibility to be vigilant about all the forces at work,” Davey told me. “That means being aware of opportunists, for-profit companies that want to protect their bottom lines and look politically neutral, and hyperpartisan followers and conspiracy theorists.”YouTube and one of its biggest stars make up: The video site and the video-game-playing Swede known as PewDiePie soured on each other a few years ago after he made anti-Semitic comments. The Washington Post writes that he’s now committed to making online broadcasts only on YouTube, in a sign of internet companies’ focus on live webcasts. And, most likely, both YouTube and PewDiePie need each other financially.Knowledge of Facebook is more important than campaign experience: With most in-person political campaigning on hold, The Verge reports that political candidates are borrowing internet stars’ attention-getting techniques, like hosting online sessions with celebrities and holding virtual bathtub story time. Me next! Karan Singh, a magician in India, has spent about 12 hours a day since the pandemic started performing card tricks and feats of mentalism by online video for anyone who asks. “I did it for my mental health, because I would have gone mad if I didn’t have an audience to perform for,” Singh told my colleague David Segal. This postal worker interrupts and absolutely steals the show. (Thanks to my colleague Erin Griffith for spotting this delightful video.) We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you’d like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com. 