Amazon Sells More, but Warns of Much Higher Costs Ahead
By Karen WeiseSEATTLE — Online shopping during the coronavirus pandemic drove sales at Amazon far higher, the company said on Thursday. But the cost to deliver those products, and to keep its workers safe, is taking a big bite out of the company’s profits.Amazon reported that it had $75.5 billion in sales in the latest quarter, up 26 percent from a year earlier, surpassing analyst expectations. Profit fell 29 percent, to $2.5 billion, worse than expected, because it cost more to meet the increased customer demand.Amazon’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos, signaled that profits may continue to fall in the near future.“If you’re a share owner in Amazon, you may want to take a seat, because we’re not thinking small,” he said in a statement.Typically, the company would expect to make around $4 billion in operating profit in the next quarter, Mr. Bezos said. “Instead,” he added, “we expect to spend the entirety of that $4 billion, and perhaps a bit more, on Covid-related expenses getting products to customers and keeping employees safe.”The company said those costs included pay increases, declines in warehouse efficiency because of social distancing and $300 million for testing its work force for the virus.Amazon’s stock price has reached record highs this year. After Mr. Bezos’ warning, though, which came after the markets closed, its shares fell more than 5 percent.Recent months have been one of the most tumultuous periods in Amazon’s history. In March, it became overwhelmed by the surge in orders as millions of Americans heeded public health mandates to stay home. For the holiday season or its summer Prime Day special, the company spends months planning, but “the Covid crisis allowed no such preparation,” Brian Olsavsky, the company’s finance chief, said in a call with Wall Street analysts.The number of products that Amazon shipped rose 32 percent in the latest quarter. A year earlier, the increase was just 10 percent.Amazon took the unusual step of suppressing demand. And it has been battling the spread of the virus among its warehouse employees, who have been pressuring the company to provide more leave and safety precautions.On a call with reporters, the company declined to say how many of its workers had tested positive for the virus.Amazon’s grocery business got a major boost, with sales up 8 percent in its physical stores, which are mostly Whole Foods locations. They had largely been flat for at least a year.While Americans had been slow to adopt online grocery shopping, the pandemic created the shove that many needed to change behavior, at least temporarily. Mr. Olsavsky said the company had increased grocery delivery capacity more than 60 percent in the quarter and still could not meet demand. The company has set up a waiting list for new customers.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Analysts had expected profits to shrink slightly. Amazon has hired more people to work in its warehouses and raised wages $2 an hour, with additional increases for overtime. The company hired about 80,000 warehouse workers in March, and 95,000 more in April. Some of those new hires were filling in for employees who stayed home because of the pandemic.Also, the mix of what customers are buying has shifted to less profitable types of products. Normally, more than a third of surveyed Amazon customers say they bought clothing on the site in the previous month, but that fell to 27 percent in March, according to the investment bank Cowen & Company. Usually, a quarter of shoppers had recently bought consumable products like toilet paper on Amazon, but in March that jumped to 33 percent, the bank said.“No one likes to sell essentials because that’s a lower-margin business,” said Ron Josey, an analyst with the investment bank JMP Securities.