Facebook Points to ‘Signs of Stability’ as Ad Declines Flatten
By Mike IsaacSAN FRANCISCO — Facebook cautioned Wall Street on Wednesday that it could face intensifying difficulties in its advertising business from the coronavirus pandemic, but also indicated that the toll would not be deep.The company, which reported rising revenue and profit for the first three months of the year, said that it experienced a significant reduction in advertising in the last three weeks of March and that its business would continue to be affected by “issues beyond our control.” It added that it would not give forecasts about future financial results because of the coronavirus impact.But the ad declines flattened in April, Facebook said, adding that it had “seen signs of stability” and that “advertising revenue has been approximately flat compared to the same period a year ago.”Coupled with relatively robust financial results from Google’s parent company, Alphabet, on Tuesday and from Microsoft on Wednesday, Facebook and other tech giants appear to be limiting the pain from the pandemic as people flock to their digital services while in lockdown.Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s founder and chief executive, has said use of the company’s video and voice calling services doubled or more over the past six weeks. Engineers are working around the clock just to “keep the lights on,” he has said.More than three billion people now use one of the company’s apps every month, Facebook said, up from 2.7 billion people a year earlier. Engagement has surged, though the social network said it expected some of the increase to subside as shelter-in-place orders are lifted.“Like Google, Facebook has an opportunity to emerge from the coronavirus crisis as a stronger player,” said Martin Garner, an internet analyst at CCS Insight, a marketing intelligence firm. “One key impact of the virus will be to accelerate companies’ use of digital services in everything from advertising to collaboration.”For the first quarter, Facebook said its revenue rose 18 percent to $17.74 billion from a year earlier, while profit more than doubled to $4.9 billion, far surpassing Wall Street estimates. A year ago, Facebook’s profits were hurt when it took a $3 billion charge to pay a privacy settlement with the Federal Trade Commission.Facebook recently warned that the increased usage of its services in the coronavirus outbreak might not lead to increased revenue since the company does not make money off many of its video and voice calling services.“This is not going to be business as usual, and the marketing industry is certainly going to see a real impact,” Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, said in a television interview last month. “I don’t think anyone knows how big. So we’re going to watch and look.”But the downturn has also given Facebook an opportunity to trim expenses and to deploy its resources into new products. Last week, the company introduced a new video chat product, called Rooms, that will be rolled out across Instagram, Messenger, WhatsApp and the main Facebook app.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Facebook said its own spending was also down, largely related to slowing travel and event planning costs, which have come to a virtual standstill because of the coronavirus. The virus has also slowed hiring. All of that would keep its expenses down, Facebook said. It estimated it would save $2 billion to $4 billion in expenditures this year.