The Week in Tech: We’re Testing How Much the Internet Can Handle
By Cade MetzNext week, Bits will be evolving into the On Tech With Shira Ovide newsletter. With a pandemic upon us, the significant effect that technology is having on our families, work, safety and sense of self is even more apparent. What is this reliance on technology doing to us and our communities — and is it good or bad? Shira will be your guide to this constantly changing world, during the coronavirus crisis and beyond.If you no longer wish to receive the email, simply unsubscribe using the email address at the bottom of this newsletter before Monday.We appreciate your readership, and we’re eager to hear your thoughts on what you want more or less of so we can make the newsletter experience even better for you. Please share your thoughts on this form. A reporter or editor may follow up with you to learn more.We were already so dependent on technology. Now, even more so.Hi, I’m Cade Metz. I write about emerging technology in The New York Times’s San Francisco bureau. Like many of you, I’m working from my home.As my colleagues Mike Isaac and Sheera Frenkel reported, the volume of messages sent via Facebook and Instagram has grown more than 50 percent in countries that have ordered people to stay home amid the coronavirus outbreak. Voice calls over Facebook apps have more than doubled. In Italy, where a tight quarantine is in place, the number of group calls has climbed more than 1,000 percent.And those are just the top-level stats from a single company.As our dependence continues to rise, the question is whether the technology — and the companies behind it — can handle the added strain. If they can, their hold on our lives may grow even tighter.Videoconferencing apps like Zoom and Google Hangouts, not to mention good old fashioned phone calls, are rapidly replacing the face-to-face communication so many of us crave. Microsoft said the number of people using its Teams app — a way for business colleagues to collaborate — grew 37 percent in one week, rising past 44 million.Not everything can be delivered over the internet as easily as a video feed, but online retailers are an increasingly important path to all the stuff that can’t. Amazon is hiring more than 10,000 more workers to deal with the enormous spike in online shopping.Nextdoor, a social networking app for connecting with neighbors, is helping people get their hands on prescription medicines and all sorts of other stuff they cannot exactly order through Amazon. As described by John Herrman, a Times tech and media reporter, no physical contact is required.In the long run, the companies behind all this technology could emerge from the pandemic as an even greater force in our lives. So said a Mount Rushmore of Times tech reporters: Daisuke Wakabayashi, Jack Nicas, Steve Lohr and Mike Isaac.But in the short term, these companies are facing their own problems.Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, told The Times that the company was “just trying to keep the lights on” as its more than 45,000 employees — who are themselves working from home — struggled to accommodate the traffic increase. The surge is slowing download speeds and degrading video quality, as my colleagues Cecilia Kang, Davey Alba and Adam Satariano explained.According to The Washington Post, workers at 10 of Amazon’s warehouses have tested positive for the coronavirus, and some facilities have been temporarily shut down for cleaning. Other workers have been quarantined.Google and Facebook could lose more than $44 billion in revenue this year because of the pandemic, as the world’s businesses cut back on advertising. Of course, as Variety’s Todd Spangler pointed out, both tech giants will still be enormously profitable.Though advertising dollars are dropping, the appetite for news on these services is moving rapidly in the other direction. According to an internal company report obtained by The Times, the past few weeks have brought “an unprecedented increase in the consumption of news articles on Facebook.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Everyone wants to know what’s happening and what to do. Hopefully, the news will keep coming even as the ad dollars keep dropping.Two start-ups were marketing at-home kits that let people collect saliva samples and throat swabs and send them to labs for coronavirus testing. But both companies suspended sales after the Food and Drug Administration said it had not authorized such products, Natasha Singer reported.Two iPhone manufacturers in India suspended production because of the coronavirus lockdown, according to Bloomberg News.Apple may even delay the launch of the 5G iPhone as the pandemic disrupts the company’s supply chain and threatens to soften demand, Nikkei Asian Review reported.Some worry that personal privacy is at risk as governments track the spread of the coronavirus. That’s the word from Natasha Singer and Choe Sang-Hun.Slovakia passed a law that lets the government use data from telecom companies to track the movements of people suffering from coronavirus, The Financial Time said.Not all news is coronavirus news: Jack Nicas reported that U.S. trade officials had approved Apple’s request to remove tariffs on the Apple Watch.There is a racial divide in speech recognition. In a new study, technology from Amazon, Apple, Google, IBM and Microsoft misidentified 35 percent of words from people who were black — and only 19 percent from people who were white.Uber and Lyft are opposing jobless benefits and sick days for gig workers even in states where they are eligible, Noam Scheiber reported.How are we doing?We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bits_newsletter@nytimes.com.Like this email?