What’s on TV Friday: ‘The Good Fight’ and ‘Les Misérables’
By Gabe CohnTHE GOOD FIGHT Stream on CBS All Access. “Who’s president?” Diane Lockhart, the high-powered lawyer played by Christine Baranski, asks at the start of the new season of this legal drama. The response may surprise you, as it does her: Hillary Clinton. The former first lady has been head of state for three years, and everybody but Diane knows it. “Diane, are you micro-dosing again?” asks Marissa Gold (Sarah Steele). So begins a surreal Season 4 premiere, in which Diane wakes up in this new alternate reality, which she adjusts to gratefully. Followers of the show, a spinoff of “The Good Wife,” will know that the alternate political landscape is a dream for Diane — the show began with her numbed by the inauguration of Donald Trump — but it turns out that this other reality isn’t as rosy as she might have imagined.LES MISÉRABLES (2019) Stream on Amazon. Montfermeil, a commune near Paris that Victor Hugo used as a setting for his novel “Les Misérables,” is the main backdrop of this drama, set in contemporary France. The movie, from the filmmaker Ladj Ly, centers on tension between police and residents in Montfermeil. At its core is a trio of cops sent to retrieve a lion cub stolen from a traveling circus by a local teen. Their violent handling of the assignment leads to a popular uproar. In his review for The New York Times, Glenn Kenny wrote that Ly “shows command of staging and shooting throughout, simulating documentary form while maintaining a tight grip on narrative coherence.”SWORD OF TRUST (2019) 8:30 p.m. on Showtime. Two women walk into a pawnshop to hawk a Civil War-era sword. Marc Maron is behind the counter. That’s the setup of this most recent feature from the filmmaker Lynn Shelton. In it, Maron plays a sarcastic Alabama pawnshop owner who teams up with the women (played by Jillian Bell and Michaela Watkins) and his younger assistant (Jon Bass) to find a buyer for the sword, which turns out to be highly valuable to online conspiracy theorists. “The humor has a persistent goofy streak, but what sticks to the ribs is the poignant stuff,” Glenn Kenny wrote in his review for The Times in 2019. “Maron’s long monologue explaining how his character came to own the pawnshop is not only one of the best pieces of acting he’s done, but it’s a performance highlight of the year.”