What Is ‘Westworld’ Without Westworld?
By Christopher OrrLOS ANGELES — The glass walls are a problem.I’m on the set of “Westworld,” the HBO sci-fi drama whose third season debuts on Sunday. But the parched prairies and old-timey saloons of the first two seasons feel like a distant memory. Instead, the returning star Evan Rachel Wood and the series newcomer Aaron Paul are walking onto a soundstage that’s been made up like the interior of a futuristic barracks, where they cautiously survey a couple dozen small, empty rooms stocked with beds and desks. (To say much more would be a spoiler.)But the walls of the rooms are made of glass, which means unwanted reflections of the crew and onlookers are everywhere.Fortunately, the show knows how to deal with this issue: Rolling frames like giant coat-racks are brought in bearing drapes for us to hide behind, and voilà: No more reflections. We are literally the men — and women, notably episode director Helen Shaver — behind the curtain.It was a neat conjurer’s trick on a show that has been defined by its abundance of them: unannounced flashes forward and back, characters with hidden motives or identities, confounding twists both large and small. This relentless complexity can be intoxicating, but it can also be overwhelming.HBO had initially hoped “Westworld” would serve as its post-“Game of Thrones” tent-pole drama. But while the show’s first season was mostly a success, the second slipped a bit, seeing its audience decline by about 14 percent on average and provoking widespread backlash from viewers and critics alike. “All the things that worked about Season 1 are breaking Season 2,” Megan McArdle wrote in The Washington Post. “What we have now,” Miles Surrey wrote for The Ringer, “is a purposefully confusing series.”In comments to members of the Television Critics Association after Season 2, even Casey Bloys, HBO’s president of programming, allowed that the show is not for “casual viewers.” “The people who love it, really love it,” he said. “Even the people who dislike it feel the need to discuss it.”Created by the married duo Lisa Joy and Jonathan Nolan, “Westworld” is based on Michael Crichton’s campy 1973 film about a Wild West theme park in which customers amuse themselves by shooting robotic desperados and bedding robotic prostitutes, until the robots tire of such impositions and revolt. (Think “Gunsmoke” meets “Frankenstein.”) In Joy and Nolan’s telling, the android “hosts” were reimagined as sympathetic protagonists, and their revolt became a parable about the wages of human cruelty, hubris and greed. By the end of Season 2, the hosts had demolished the park and escaped into the larger world to pursue various ambitions including, in the case of Wood’s character, Dolores, global dominion.So what is “Westworld” the show, now that it has broken free from Westworld the park?It’s not a reboot, precisely. Joy and Nolan say they always intended to go in the current direction, and that their description of the post-park phase of the show was a high point in their initial pitch to HBO. But neither is the new season a straightforward continuation of what came before. Thandie Newton, who plays the host Maeve, goes so far as to characterize the first two seasons as a “preamble” for what is now to come. As Nolan put it, the show has “transformed itself.”The question is whether it has transformed itself enough to reassure old viewers and bring in new ones. Bloys has said that there are already deals in place for “potential” fourth and fifth seasons, and the cast and creators hope to keep it going past this season, at least. But for a show as expensive to make as “Westworld” — estimates for the first season topped $100 million; HBO declined to discuss costs — this new beginning may also represent a final opportunity for the series to prove itself worthy of HBO’s continued investment.The most obvious shift is aesthetic. The first two seasons of “Westworld” were characterized by the incongruous relationship between the show’s sci-fi premise and its Old West setting: six-shooters programmed to kill only the right (artificial) people, horses powered by hydraulics.Season 3 feels more of a piece, a show about the future that doesn’t spend so much time mimicking the past. The first trailer — which featured Paul’s character, Caleb, wandering through a technologically optimized Los Angeles — toyed with this shift: It wasn’t even identifiable as “Westworld” until Wood (and the series logo) materialized at the end.“We wanted to keep people guessing and then bring them back in,” Joy said.This near future is eminently recognizable and, on the surface, appears clean and well-organized — more like the gilded cage of “Brave New World” than the police state of “1984.” Visually, the show’s Los Angeles, where much of the action takes place, is closer to the placid metropolis of Spike Jonze’s “Her” than to the rain-bitten version of Ridley Scott’s “Blade Runner.” (Both films served as stylistic inspirations for the new season.)To achieve the desired look, “Westworld,” like “Game of Thrones” before it, has been made into a globe-spanning enterprise. The show spent about a week shooting locations in Singapore to take advantage of the city’s modernist architecture. In Valencia, Spain, the planetarium of the City of Arts and Sciences provided the exterior for the San Francisco headquarters of Delos, the corporation that runs Westworld. The boardroom interior, built on a soundstage here, was designed to precisely match the contours of the Spanish building — pans of water were even placed beneath the “windows” to refract light upward like the pools that surround the original.Apart from the occasional futuristic helicopter — the province then, as now, of the ultrarich — the technology on physical display is limited. Caleb, a construction worker, is occasionally accompanied by a clunky robot partner. But rather than serve up flying cars, the show offers merely remote-controlled motorcycles and driverless ride-shares. Nolan said the intention was to extrapolate about three decades into the future.“If I look around, there’s shockingly little that has changed in the last 30 years,” he said. “The big change, of course, is that everybody’s carrying a cellphone around.” Likewise, the technology in the show’s imagined future has evolved inward more than outward.At the smaller end of the spectrum, this entails advances such as RICO, a kind of crowdsourcing crime app that enables users to earn cash by serving as anonymous links in the chains of planned heists and kidnappings. At the larger end is Rehoboam, an enormous server named after a biblical king that uses its vast store of personal data to determine the life-paths of every human being. (Applying for a new job? Rehoboam will tell the prospective employer whether or not you are a proper fit.) This triumph of artificial intelligence represents another of the new season’s cunning inversions: In the park, machines had their futures mapped by human beings; in the wider world, human beings have their futures mapped by a machine.Rehoboam is representative of a broader shift that “Westworld” makes in Season 3, from the allegorical to the more nearly literal. The hosts of the first two seasons, fitfully struggling toward consciousness between occupational assaults and killings, were always stand-ins in a parable about free will and enslavement. This time around, it’s the human beings — such as Caleb, an ex-soldier assigned to a dead-end job — who are trapped in loops not of their choosing. Little wonder that he finds himself drawn to Dolores’s plan to overthrow the system.Dolores, of course, is not the only host to have escaped the park. As we saw at the end of Season 2, she has brought with her a handful of “pearls,” each of which contains the consciousness of a host. But which hosts? Whereas the principal sleight of hand in Season 2 essentially repeated that of Season 1 — the story lines of first Dolores and then Bernard, a host played by Jeffrey Wright, shifted perplexingly between past and present — in Season 3, we have a new puzzle to solve: identity. Whose mind, for instance, is inside the body of Charlotte (Tessa Thompson), another host working on behalf of Dolores?“It is definitely still a guessing game,” Wood said. The difference is that the operative question is no longer “when?” but “who?”While “Westworld” is still an ensemble show, Dolores is now driving its narrative, with other characters increasingly responding to her actions and plans. Wood even gets a few opportunities to show off her taekwondo skills. (The actress is a black belt.) The shift to modern clothing hasn’t hurt either: Wood happily explained that it’s easier to play a ninja-like femme fatale now that she’s no longer performing in a corset.Among the other major returning characters, Newton’s Maeve was last seen dead (or the android equivalent) and in the park. But as the trailers make clear, neither condition persists for long, and she ultimately will find herself in mortal conflict with Dolores. Bernard, too, is trying — as Dolores knew he would — to thwart her plan for vengeance. And the Man in Black (Ed Harris) is still kicking around unhappily, having murdered his daughter last season because he believed her to be a host. Joining Paul as newcomers to the series are Vincent Cassel and, in smaller roles, Lena Waithe and the Seattle Seahawks running back Marshawn Lynch.Do the show’s intricate narratives still wander into outright obscurity? Occasionally — this is still “Westworld,” after all.“The way that we’ve always dealt with complexity has been, ‘What would the characters know?’” Joy said. “So if there is disorientation with the characters, we’re allowed to feel that.”That said, the convolutions and mysteries of Season 3, focused primarily on identities rather than disparate timelines, seem less likely to rankle viewers than those that came before did. And as the show’s first Everyman protagonist, Caleb serves as a useful viewer proxy: He’s right there with us, trying to wrap his mind around what’s going on.The sleek aesthetics, meanwhile, are hard to resist. While on set, I witnessed a late-season sword battle in an Asian-themed nightclub that was riveting, even without knowing its context.Will such evolutions be enough to secure a fourth season of “Westworld”? Despite hints to the contrary — one trailer features Dolores uttering the line “Welcome to the end of the game” — Joy and Nolan say they are committed to extending the story if HBO gives them the green light.“For better or worse, they’re letting us make the show we want to make,” Nolan said. “Our hope is that we can steer the narrative in different directions and the audience will be excited to come along.”The cast appears to share the sentiment, even if the actors don’t yet know where Joy and Nolan plan to take things. “I don’t think we’re done with our story,” Wood said.