Pete Buttigieg Hosts ‘Jimmy Kimmel Live’ Without an Audience
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.On Thursday, late night shows (except for “The Late Late Show with James Corden”) taped without audiences because of the coronavirus. The former presidential candidate Pete Buttigieg, who was guest-hosting “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” joked: “But when you don’t have a real audience, you have to fake one, just like Trump’s inauguration.”Stephen Colbert’s show was his taped rehearsal, as he mentioned several times throughout the broadcast. Seth Meyers delivered his “A Closer Look” segment in a digital-only “Late Night Casual Thursday” release.And while all of late night had been set to continue crowdless next week, three of the shows’ respective networks announced Thursday evening that they would be suspended until late March, if not longer.President Trump used a teleprompter for his Wednesday night address from the Oval Office, but it still had a number of errors, including his suggestion that all travel from Europe would be suspended (Americans and others are exempt) and that insurance companies would waive co-payments for coronavirus treatment (just for testing, not treatment). He also referred to the virus as “foreign.”“I would understand if Trump made mistakes, right, if this whole thing was off the cuff. But how is it possible to get so many things wrong in a prewritten speech? This is crazy! Watching an Oval address shouldn’t be a game of Two Truths and a Lie.” — TREVOR NOAH“[imitating Trump] Please remember, very important for all countries and businesses to know, nothing I say is true, pay no attention to the man behind the bronzer.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“OK, first of all, it isn’t a foreign virus. It’s just a virus, OK? Trump makes it sound like corona doesn’t speak English.” — TREVOR NOAH“During his address, Trump said starting Friday people from Europe can’t fly to the U.S. He was like, ‘We have to stop the virus so instead of everyone flying here, I want everyone to take a cruise.’” — JIMMY FALLON“And, also, we can blame Europe for many things — colonialism, skinny jeans, Piers Morgan — but this virus is worldwide, all right? It was going to get here no matter what Europe did.” — TREVOR NOAH“I’m sorry, what? The U.K. is fine because it’s got ‘the border’? Other countries in Europe also have ‘the border,’ unless maybe — does he mean the water? Is that it? What, does Trump think the coronavirus doesn’t know how to swim? Because that’s racist.” — TREVOR NOAH“But Trump wanted to give a speech to reassure the nation that everything is going to be OK, and I think it worked. Today the stock market only dropped 2,000 points.” — JIMMY FALLON“Coronavirus isn’t sparing anyone, including America’s sweetheart, Chet Haze’s dad.” — DESUS NICE“Yes, ladies and gentlemen, corona got to Tom Hanks. And this man’s already been through so much. I mean, think about it. After the war he’s been through and that time his plane crashed, and he already had to deal with his dog dying. I feel bad for him. I mean, at the same time, he shouldn’t have been letting everyone touch his chocolates. That’s probably how he got it.” — TREVOR NOAH“But, regardless, he has announced that him and his wife, Rita Wilson, are going to be in isolation. And, luckily, he’s used to being stuck alone with Wilson, so he’ll be fine.” — TREVOR NOAH“Hey, coronavirus! OK, yeah, you can shut down Italy, you can shut down South Korea, you can destroy our economy, but keep your filthy nucleocapsid proteins off Tom Hanks! The man is an American treasure! This is like learning the Liberty Bell has herpes.” — STEPHEN COLBERTSeth Meyers popped by “Desus & Mero” on Thursday, where he accurately identified Rudy Giuliani’s teeth from a super-close-up shot.