What’s on TV Wednesday: An Adventure Series and ‘68 Whiskey’
By Gabe CohnEXPEDITION WITH STEVE BACKSHALL 10 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). “I think it’s really important that we’re rational today,” Steve Backshall says in the first episode of this adventure series. Moments later, Backshall and his team begin a rock climbing descent down a large canyon, one he describes as “four times the height of London’s Big Ben.” Few viewers, thankfully, are likely to tune to this British show to see perfectly rational behavior: “Expedition” follows Backshall, an adventurer known for hosting the BBC Show “Deadly 60,” as he ventures across various rugged frontiers, from flooded caves in Mexico to white water rapids in Bhutan. This first episode finds him in Oman. And that descent he compares to Big Ben? It’s just the prelude to an even more intense climb.68 WHISKEY 10 p.m. on Paramount Network. Body bags, military helicopters and camouflage uniforms aren’t the standard-issue tools of humor, but they feature prominently in this new comedy-drama series, which is set on a United States military base in Afghanistan. Something like a modern-day “M*A*S*H,” “68 Whiskey” centers on a group of United States Army medics. Its debut episode involves a discharge, a cute goat and a clandestine hookup.JARHEAD (2005) 11 p.m. on Showtime. For far more straight-faced military drama than “68 Whiskey” offers, consider turning to “Jarhead,” which stars Jake Gyllenhaal as a soldier fighting in the first gulf war. Directed by Sam Mendes, the film would also be a fitting choice for those who saw Mendes’s “1917” — a World War I movie and a leading Oscar contender — and want to see the director’s take on a different conflict.THE MASTER (2012) Stream on Netflix; rent on Amazon, iTunes and Vudu. Joaquin Phoenix is up for the best actor Oscar this year for his performance in “Joker.” If he wins, it will be the first time that he’s landed the award. But he’s been nominated twice before: Once for the Johnny Cash biopic “Walk the Line,” and more recently for “The Master,” a hallucinatory drama from Paul Thomas Anderson. Set in 1950, the film stars Phoenix as Freddie Quell, a World War II veteran and alcoholic who falls under the spell of a California cult leader played by Philip Seymour Hoffman. The cast also includes Amy Adams and Laura Dern, who is herself up for a best supporting actress Oscar this year. In his review for The New York Times, A.O. Scott called the film “a glorious and haunting symphony of color, emotion and sound.” This is a movie, he wrote, “that defies understanding even as it compels reverent, astonished belief.”