4 Film Series to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend
By Ben KenigsbergOur guide to film series and special screenings happening this weekend and in the week ahead. All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies.BLACK WOMEN: TRAILBLAZING AFRICAN AMERICAN ACTRESSES AND IMAGES, 1920-2001 at Film Forum (Jan. 17-Feb. 13). In an extraordinarily wide-ranging series, Film Forum examines the portrayal of African-American women throughout film history and celebrates the legacies of the actresses who played them. They range from Evelyn Preer (“Within Our Gates,” on Jan. 28) and Iris Hall (“The Symbol of the Unconquered,” on Jan. 30), who starred in silent films by the pioneering black director Oscar Micheaux, to the blaxploitation icon Pam Grier (“Coffy,” on Saturday, and “Foxy Brown,” on Feb. 1, among others) and beyond. The program’s nominal endpoint, 2001, was the year that “Monster’s Ball” (on Feb. 11 and 13) came out. Its star, Halle Berry, won the best actress Oscar for her role, becoming the first and so far only black woman to receive that honor.212-727-8110, filmforum.orgINFLUENCING THE ODYSSEY: FILMS THAT INSPIRED STANLEY KUBRICK AND ARTHUR C. CLARKE at the Museum of the Moving Image (Jan. 17-Feb. 2). As a sidebar to a new exhibition on the making of “2001: A Space Odyssey,” the museum is screening movies that had an influence, direct or oblique, on Stanley Kubrick’s 1968 masterpiece. The impact of Max Ophüls’s “The Earrings of Madame De …” (on Friday and Sunday) can perhaps be seen in the elegant movement and tempo of Kubrick’s film. The museum cites “How the West Was Won” (on Saturday and Sunday), which was originally shown in three-strip Cinerama, as being an inspiration for the scale and multipart structure of “2001.”718-784-0077, movingimage.us[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]NEW YORK JEWISH FILM FESTIVAL at Film at Lincoln Center (through Jan. 28). The tension between modernity and tradition is always on display at this annual series, whose lineup blends the new and the old. Old in this case stretches back to “Broken Barriers” (on Sunday), a silent feature from 1919 based on the writing of Sholem Aleichem; it’s showing in a new restoration with live accompaniment. The festival will also host 50th-anniversary screenings of “The Garden of the Finzi-Continis” (on Jan. 26 and 27), Vittorio De Sica’s portrait of a Jewish Italian family facing the tightening grip of Fascism. The closing-night feature, “Crescendo,” stars Peter Simonischek (“Toni Erdmann”) as a conductor who tries to convene a youth orchestra that combines Israeli and Palestinian musicians.212-875-5601, filmlinc.org