6 Classical Music Concerts to See in N.Y.C. This Weekend
By David AllenOur guide to the city’s best classical music and opera happening this weekend and in the week ahead.BUDAPEST FESTIVAL ORCHESTRA at David Geffen Hall (Feb. 23, 3 p.m.; Feb. 24, 8 p.m.). Always a highlight of any season, the visit of this exceptional orchestra and its provocative music director, Ivan Fischer, comprises two concerts this year, each devoted to a composer in whom these forces have a strong tradition. Dvorak is the focus on Sunday, with works that include the Symphony No. 8 and the Violin Concerto, with Renaud Capuçon as the soloist. Mahler takes over on Monday, with Gerhild Romberger singing the “Kindertotenlieder” before a performance of the Symphony No. 5. Mahlerians, take note that David Robertson is also conducting the Symphony No. 5 in the coming week, with the Juilliard Orchestra at Carnegie Hall (Tuesday, 8 p.m.).212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org/great-performersCHAMBER MUSIC SOCIETY OF LINCOLN CENTER at Alice Tully Hall (Feb. 25, 7:30 p.m.). Five wind players, including the flutist Tara Helen O’Connor, take in the history of works for a wind ensemble, with the occasional help of the pianist Michael Brown. From the 18th century, there is Mozart’s Quintet for Piano and Winds; from the 19th, Reicha’s Wind Quintet, Op. 91, No. 3; and from the 20th, Françaix’s “L’Heure du Berger,” Barber’s “Summer Music” and Ligeti’s Six Bagatelles for Wind Quintet.212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]CONCERTO KÖLN at Alice Tully Hall (Feb. 27, 7:30 p.m.). A violin extravaganza from this early-music orchestra, one that features the ensemble’s four concert masters — Mayumi Hirasaki, Jésus Merino Ruiz, Shunske Sato and Evgeny Sviridov — take the spotlight in concertos by Handel, Bach, Vivaldi, Locatelli and Geminiani. It’s a busy week ahead for period-instrument fans: At Zankel Hall, the Venice Baroque Orchestra and the mezzo-soprano Ann Hallenberg pay tribute to the Swedish soprano Jenny Lind with music by Vivaldi, Handel and others (Feb. 27, 7:30 p.m.); at Miller Theater, Quicksilver explores the rise of the sonata (Saturday, 8 p.m.); and at Carnegie, the Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique continues its landmark Beethoven cycle (Friday and Monday, 8 p.m.; Sunday, 2 p.m.).212-247-7800, carnegiehall.orgNEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (Feb. 27, 7:30 p.m.; through Feb. 29). Franz Welser-Möst has done remarkable things with the ensemble that he normally directs, the Cleveland Orchestra, so here is an opportunity to see what he can do at the helm of the Philharmonic. He conducts Strauss’s “Symphonia domestica” and the U.S. premiere of Jörg Widmann’s “Babylon” Suite.212-875-5656, nyphil.org‘LA TRAVIATA’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Feb. 26, 7:30 p.m.; through March 19). The second run for Michael Mayer’s production this season is a showcase for its Violetta, the soprano who won last year’s Richard Tucker Award, Lisette Oropesa. She is joined by the Alfredo of Piero Pretti and the Germont of Luca Salsi, under the baton of Bertrand de Billy. 212-362-6000, metopera.org