What’s on TV Sunday: ‘Penny Dreadful: City of Angels’ and ‘Vida’
By Sara AridiPENNY DREADFUL: CITY OF ANGELS 10:10 p.m. on Showtime.  John Logan, the creator behind the fantasy horror series “Penny Dreadful,” which ended in 2016, follows it up with this spinoff. Set in 1938 Los Angeles, “City of Angels” delivers a packed narrative: A Mexican-American detective, Tiago Vega (Daniel Zovatto), and his partner, Lewis Michener (Nathan Lane), investigate the grisly murder of a prominent Beverly Hills family. Their search plays out while the city is building its freeway system and displacing Chicano families in the process. A shape-shifting demon inspired by Mexican folklore (played by Natalie Dormer of “Game of Thrones”) somehow ties into all of this, while subplots involving Nazi insurgents and police brutality bring the series, or at least its themes, to the present. “Even though our show is set in 1938, it has to be about 2020 or it has no reason to exist,” Logan said in a recent interview with The New York Times. “Race relations, social engineering, politics, espionage — all of that was bubbling away exactly the way it’s bubbling away now.” The series finale of HOMELAND leads in at 9 p.m.GOD FRIENDED ME 8 p.m. on CBS. The spiritual journey at the heart of this comedy-drama wraps up after two seasons. Miles (Brandon Micheal Hall), an atheist podcast producer, has been helping New Yorkers sent to him as friend suggestions on Facebook by an account called God. In this two-hour series finale, Miles works to reunite an estranged father and son and reconsiders his faith after the God account nudges him in the direction of his ailing sister.VIDA 9 p.m. on Starz. The end is near for this beloved drama series, about estranged Mexican-American sisters who reconvene to run their late mother’s bar in the east side of Los Angeles. In Season 2, Lyn (Melissa Barrera) and Emma (Mishel Prada) searched for new ways to bring business to their establishment, only to be met by enraged activists who claimed they were further gentrifying the neighborhood. At the outset of the third and final season, business is booming and both Lyn and Emma are happy in new relationships. Then they’re delivered a shock: Their father, whom their mother led them to believe was dead, is alive after all, and the sisters wonder whether it’s worth reconnecting with what little family they have left.