Late Night Goes Live After South Carolina’s Democratic Debate
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.On Tuesday night, seven Democratic presidential hopefuls staged a debate in South Carolina, or as “The Daily Show” called it: “Finally, a state with black voters.” Both Trevor Noah and Stephen Colbert went live as soon as the debate ended, providing on-the-spot commentary.“We are live following the South Carolina debate airing right here on CBS with Bernie Sanders, Michael Bloomberg and Joe Biden, so a little young for CBS.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“When people first saw Bernie, Bloomberg and Biden, they thought it was a live audition for ‘Old Sheldon.’” — JIMMY FALLON“Which explains why Bernie Sanders answered every question with ‘bazinga!’” — JAMES CORDEN“CBS is, of course, also home to the long-running soap opera, ‘The Bold and the Beautiful,’ and in an effort to draw in those viewers, here’s how they promoted tonight’s debate: ‘The Old and the Buttigieg.’” — JAMES CORDEN“That means CBS is now home to both ‘The Amazing Race’ and ‘The really long, annoying race.’” — JAMES CORDEN“I haven’t seen white people go at each other that hard since khakis were on sale at Banana Republic.” — TREVOR NOAH“You could tell Bernie was feeling good. Before the debate, he picked up a new suit from the dumpster behind T.J. Maxx.” — JIMMY FALLON“Bernie has a lot of plans — expensive plans — but he’s smart. He’s no dummy. Every time one of the other candidates asked who’s going to pay for these programs, he’d just point to Bloomberg and said, ‘Him!’” — JIMMY KIMMEL“After a rough debate last week, Mike Bloomberg tried preparing for tonight a little differently. For instance, this time, he prepared.” — JIMMY FALLON“So far Bloomberg spent about $500 million to get smacked around by Elizabeth Warren on television.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“Man, when it comes to Bloomberg, Elizabeth Warren is relentless. She destroyed him in the first debate, she came after him tonight. I bet when he got in his car later she just popped up in the back seat like, ‘Oh, and another thing.’” — TREVOR NOAH“Now you have to remember, this debate was in South Carolina, right? The first state where black voters hold sway. So all the candidates made sure to show everyone that they were down with the brown.” — TREVOR NOAH“[Imitating Bloomberg] If I was black, I wouldn’t have gotten this far because my police would have slammed me against the wall and frisked me and then I would have said, ‘Wait, it’s me!’ And they would have said, ‘Shut up, blackie!’ And then they’d search my pockets and be like, ‘Whose $60 billion is this?’ And I would be like, ‘It’s mine from when I was white!’ ‘We’ve heard that before!’” — TREVOR NOAH, on Bloomberg’s saying he wouldn’t have gotten as far as he had if he were black “[As Bloomberg] A lot of them are in the audience tonight. Officer, stop them. Check their pockets. There’s an endorsement in there someplace, I promise you.” — STEPHEN COLBERT, on Bloomberg’s saying 100 black elected officials endorsed him for presidentSeth Meyers satirized the Bloomberg campaign’s recent attempt at satirical tweets about Bernie Sanders on Tuesday’s “Late Night.”Wanda Sykes will stop by “Conan” on Wednesday night to talk about her new Apple TV Plus documentary series, “Visible: Out on Television.”