What’s on TV Tuesday: ‘Jumanji: The Next Level’ and ‘Inside No. 9’
By Sara AridiJUMANJI: THE NEXT LEVEL (2019) Rent on Amazon. Set three years after 2017’s “Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle,” a reboot of the 1995 movie, this adventure film brings back the core gang — Dwayne Johnson, Kevin Hart, Karen Gillan and Jack Black — along with a few new faces. As the friends plan to reunite during winter break, one, Spencer, delves back into the Jumanji video game, and the rest of the group has no choice but to follow him. But the game malfunctions, leaving Bethany, another of the friends, in the real world and dragging in Spencer’s grandfather (Danny DeVito) and his old friend (Danny Glover). What’s more, the youngsters don’t have the same avatars as before — which makes for some amusing and not-so-amusing performances. (Hart channeling Glover? Sure. Johnson playing DeVito? Not quite.) Critics said the movie doesn’t live up to “Welcome to the Jungle,” but carries enough laughs and tantalizing action scenes to keep you in the game.INSIDE NO. 9 Stream on BritBox. This black comedy anthology from BBC is known for keeping viewers on the edge of their seats. Each half-hour episode takes place behind a door marked No. 9 and stars at least one of the two creators, Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton, who pack the show with shocking, often unnerving, twists. The fifth season is now available to stream on BritBox and features guest stars including David Morrissey (“The Walking Dead”), Jenna Coleman (“Doctor Who”) and Fionn Whitehead (“Dunkirk”). The first episode chronicles a tense back-and-forth between lovers that plays out in a soccer referee's changing room.SHAUN THE SHEEP: ADVENTURES FROM MOSSY BOTTOM Stream on Netflix. Parents looking to keep their little ones entertained during these trying times are in luck: A new season of the stop-motion animated series “Shaun the Sheep” — a spinoff of the beloved “Wallace and Gromit” franchise — is here. In “Mossy Bottom,” the small north English farm where the series takes place, our super sheep plot a teddy bear heist and take a stab at a pizza delivery service. They are joined by a few new characters, including a tireless squirrel and a rival farmer. The season arrives on the heels of “A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon,” which The New York Times contributor Jason Bailey said is “endlessly, refreshingly cheerful.”