You Can Stream, but You Can’t Hide
Face-touching, communal snack plates — watching and streaming pre-coronavirus TV amid a shutdown, there’s always something there to remind you.By James PoniewozikI could always count on Bob Belcher.My younger son and I have been making our way through the entire run of Fox’s “Bob’s Burgers” on Hulu for about a year or so. It’s our reliable go-to, a feel-good nightcap. So when we sat down a few days ago to watch the Season 9 premiere, “Just One of the Boyz 4 Now for Now,” I wasn’t really looking for an escape from coronavirus anxiety. But I wasn’t not looking for an escape, either. That’s what TV’s for now, right?In the episode’s B-plot, the hamburger slinger Bob is entrusted with caring for an adorable baby rat that his friend Teddy has been keeping in a cardboard box. This presents some complications, given that Bob prepares food for a living, especially when he learns that he has to give the ratling an intimate therapeutic massage. “Fine,” he says. “I’ll just wash my hands really, really well, like how surgeons do.”I’ll just wash my hands. Really, really well. Like how surgeons do. Ha ha, where have I heard that lately, I wondered, as I stared glumly at the soap-ravaged mitts in my lap.But never mind! This was still just a fun, silly, distracting comedy, with no relationship to our current anxious reality. Set in a beachside town whose tourism business would no doubt be drying up right now. And at the sort of small, family-owned restaurant that would probably be shuttering right now if it weren’t drawn by animators …Sigh. Even our escapes, it turns out, aren’t entirely escapes anymore.Once officials advised people to avoid public spaces, practice social distancing and self-quarantine if necessary, it seemed clear that TV, particularly streaming, would be the art form of the moment.Binge-watching wouldn’t just pass the time. It would be a kind of emergency shelter. The streaming services and their libraries were like vast tunnel networks, carved into the cultural bedrock over decades, a chance to hunker down in a psychically protected zone and visit more carefree, or at least more hands-on, times. Plenty of news outlets, like this one, offered guides to stress-melting quarantine TV.But it wasn’t long into the outbreak that I began to find that anything I watched, be it an upcoming critics’ screener or a beloved rerun, could slap me back to reality unawares.The problem wasn’t necessarily pandemic-specific material, like my screeners of “The Walking Dead: World Beyond,” the latest spinoff of the AMC drama about — well, you know. Some viewers have even sought out such stories, like the recent rush on “Contagion,” as a kind of cathartic psychological inoculation.No, it’s the once ordinary behavior that’s most triggering, the casual, off-handed references to now-verboten acts that fill shows shot before 2020.A family watch of “Derry Girls” finds the Northern Irish teens excited about a school trip to Paris, a city I was going to fly to next week that now seems as distant as the moon. What sitcom about young people in the city doesn’t involve constant apartment drop-ins, brunches, inadvisably close partying? During a cheese commercial, friends grab at a communal plate of quesadillas and I wince. I watch an episode of “Australian Survivor,” and I can only think, “Stop. Touching. Your. Faces!”How did I never notice before how much TV was a decadent Saturnalia of facial self-exploration? Casual eye-rubbing and breaching the six-foot radius: This is our porn now, and a cruel reminder. What would have been the most minor behaviors a week ago — the unprotected high-five, the leaned-in whisper, the detective getting in a suspect’s face — now seem as otherworldly as wights and flying dragons.You might think there would be a safer mental refuge in science-fiction or fantasy series, far removed from our physical realities. This would be a great time to rewatch “Lost”— although there is the whole story line about the Dharma Initiative working on a vaccine for a mysterious illness. Or “Pushing Daisies,” starring Lee Pace as a man who can never touch the woman he loves lest she die.Even HBO’s “Avenue 5,” about passengers stranded in close quarters, on an interplanetary cruise ship with questionable leadership, suddenly hits unintendedly close to Earth.Of course, we’re still going to turn to a lot of TV to get us through this period. At least I am. But we ought to be realistic about what it can and can’t do.The words “escape” and “escapist” are built into our language for entertainment. But that’s always been the wrong way to think of it. Art doesn’t exist to make you forget your life. It has all of life in it — the good and the bad and the awkward reminders. Art isn’t an anesthetic. It makes you feel things. This isn’t a failing, it’s the point.This is true both in ordinary times and extraordinary times. Even the lightest entertainment is really a way of engaging with your world on a metaphorical level. All the more so when your world is tightly, if temporarily, circumscribed.The other day, I rewatched some of “The Office” with my wife. Both of us are exiled from our own offices. (I usually work from home, but once it’s mandatory, you still feel it.) And yeah, it’s a little weird to deal with an enforced home stay by watching other people punch the clock.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.But it’s also perfect. The whole creative engine of “The Office,” after all, is that big ensemble of characters showing how the enforced closeness of a group of co-workers can drive you nuts. In the pre-corona era, you might have watched it as a fun-house mirror of your own workplace and its neuroses. Now, it summons a kind of odd instant nostalgia for weeks or even days ago.Then and now, though, it was the same show — a collection, like so many workplace sitcoms, of the ways that human contact can be sustaining and maddening. All this time, TV has been amassing a gargantuan visual history of handsy, shoulder-to-shoulder life in the Before Times, of all the enviable, boring activities we once took for granted and that we will someday enjoy, and then take for granted, again. (Maybe with cleaner hands.)Maybe it’s wrong to think of TV as a shelter in this moment after all. Maybe it’s more like a quarantine pantry: a set of experiences and ways of living that we gathered, preserved and shelved when they were in season.