What’s on TV Thursday: ‘All Day and a Night’ and ‘Blindspot’
By Gabe CohnALL DAY AND A NIGHT (2020) Stream on Netflix. “If you had all day and a night to understand your life, where would you begin?” That question is asked by Jahkor (Ashton Sanders) in a voice-over early in this drama. The movie — written and directed by Joe Robert Cole, one of the screenwriters of “Black Panther” — begins this way: One night in Oakland, Calif., Jahkor steps out of a car, breaks into a home and kills two people. The rest of the story jumps between the lead-up to and the fallout of that crime, revealing the way his life conditions made way for this violence — including Jahkor’s growing up with an abusive father (Jeffrey Wright), whom he joins in prison. Cole “effectively shows how certain systems in the United States prime its black citizens for failure,” Lovia Gyarkye wrote in her review for The New York Times. She called the film “gut-wrenching.”CAPITAL IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY (2020) Stream on Kino Marquee. How do you condense a thick book examining the past and present of economic inequality into a roughly 100-minute documentary? With a roster of academic talking-heads, a littering of archival film clips and montages and a soundtrack by Aretha Franklin and Lorde. Or at least that’s the approach taken by this documentary, an adaptation of the 2013 book of the same name by the French economist Thomas Piketty. Directed by Justin Pemberton, the film assembles interviews with Piketty and other economists, who delve into the history of economic inequality in capitalist societies, and how the past can inform the way we look at the current state of inequality. “Pemberton, who has a habit of shooting his interviewees unnervingly centered in the wide frame, keeps everything engaging and clear,” Ben Kenigsberg wrote in his review for The Times. That’s “an accomplishment in a movie that devotes around a minute to explaining the ‘stagflation’ of the 1970s,” he added. “But the film necessarily lacks the thoroughness and interrogative qualities of Piketty’s written approach.”DISNEY GALLERY: THE MANDALORIAN Stream on Disney Plus. See how Baby Yoda and company were birthed in this behind-the-scenes companion series to the “Star Wars” show “The Mandalorian.” The first episode is built around a discussion between the filmmakers who directed the series’s first season. They include Taika Waititi, who talks about the show as if it were a person. “It doesn’t take itself 100 percent seriously,” he says. “But it does believe in itself.”