How Does a New Yawker Tawk?
The #BestNYAccent challenge on Instagram brought out the sound of an unflappable city.Text by Jon CaramanicaVideo by Noah Throop and Shane O’NeillFor a city whose residents have been cooped inside for weeks, taking to pot-and-pan clanging, conch-shell blowing and clapping out of windows to express themselves publicly, the arrival last week of the #BestNYAccent challenge on Instagram was a chance for catharsis.Here were oodles of videos of born-and-bred New Yorkers talking to the camera — it hardly mattered what they were saying, only how they were saying it. The casual disregard for pointy syllables. The pacing, which vacillated between dramatically drawn-out words and tight firework-syllable clusters. The occasional “yeeerrrrrrrr,” a herald trumpet announcing the arrival of royalty.What we think of as the distinctive New York accent is really a pool of accents, a stew that draws liberally from various communities: Italian, Jewish, Jamaican, Puerto Rican, Dominican, Irish and many more. Slang might come from Yiddish, or it might come from hip-hop.But what was most striking watching the videos en masse — from every borough, from children and senior citizens, from dozens of ethnic and racial backgrounds — was just how much of what we think of as the New York accent is not about sonic specifics at all.The New York accent, as it were, is both music and ideology, instantly recognizable as sound and almost physically palpable, too. It’s about the delivery, usually offered by someone leaning in to the conversation, some combination of excitement and bristly attitude. Sometimes it’s about the liberal sprinkling of sounds and catchphrases, the salt and pepper on a conversation that actually becomes the dominant flavor. Sometimes it’s the fluent cursing.There’s a baseline indignation to the talk, as if the speaker can’t quite believe there’s even a need to have the conversation. That comes with a splash of defensiveness — the desire to protect this unavoidable, immutable and generally unselfconscious presentation that signals a whole way of life.The #BestNYAccent challenge was initiated by Nicolas Heller, a director of short films and a sort of unofficial liaison to New York City’s ample pool of eccentrics. In January, he posted on Instagram a list of the 100 best New York accents of all time, a mix of the legitimately famous and around-the-way favorites: Nas, Rhea Perlman, Cardi B, Luis Guzmán and so on. While recently sidelined with Covid-19-like symptoms, Heller decided to turn his preoccupation with the sound of New York into a social media challenge.The contest received several hundred submissions and was viewed hundreds of thousands of times. Celebrities, trapped at home like everyone else, tapped in: Debi Mazar, Chazz Palminteri, The Kid Mero, Kathrine Narducci, John Joseph from the Cro-Mags and more. (No Rosie Perez, sadly.) Notionally, there was a winner: Charlie da Wolf, a foulmouthed septuagenarian from Williamsburg. But the robustness of the entries as a whole was revivifying.Of the well-known, Mazar’s video was the most casually controlled — seconds in, she apologized for her “dog chewing on a bone” though what you really heard was “awww ooh oahhh,” just pure vowel massage. When @yoitsfrench said “Bronx,” the word deflated like a cartoon balloon or a trumpet just as its player’s embouchure loosens. Some videos were highly performed and nimble: @_._patria_._ switched accents seamlessly, speaking in raucous Spanish one minute and proclaiming, “Carole Zabar is dead my cousin,” the next.The Brooklyn entries tended to be a little tougher, the ones from the Bronx a little more exuberant. But even still, drawing a throughline within any one borough’s sound was difficult — people move between boroughs, communities immigrate and emigrate, the Williamsburg of the ’60s wasn’t the same as of the ’90s.Bluster was universal, though.“I won already fair and square,” cooed @sexxystaceface.“I’ll wait here for you to call me,” said @dawnmarieferrara.“Even my inside voice, the voice in my head, has a New York accent,” barked @tfeightnyc. He was not impressed with his fellow competitors: “You people sound like you’re from Schenectady!”transcript“Y’alls want to hear the best New York accent?” “Best New York accent.” “Best New York accent.” “So last week, I noticed that Nico Heller, who’s someone I follow on Instagram, was putting together a best New York accent challenge.” “All these people are emailing me this link to apply for a New York accent contest on Instagram.” “You’re worried about a [expletive] New York accent?” “I’m like, apply for an accent contest on Instagram?” “You don’t have nothing else better to do?” “So Nicholas Heller, New York Nico, his subjects are often characters who are just literally on your corner.” “Listen, my buddy Nico, got a thing going on about the best New York accent.” “Nico told me he was putting together a best New York accent contest. You already know.” “I got the best New York accent, New York Nico.” “Shoutout to New York Nico. Ah-ah-ah, ah-ah-ah.” “For the past four or five years, I’ve been running this Instagram account called New York Nico, where I go out every day and just find New York City talent.” “New York.” “Talent can be a street performer, a store owner. Anything and everything is a talent. I’ve been able to give these talented New Yorkers the boost they deserve. A lot of them have gone on to be on ‘Ellen’ and ‘Wendy Williams.’” “New York Nico — shoutout to him, though.” “I mean, it’s obviously been really tough not being able to go out and document the city, but I’m trying to make lemonade with lemons.” “My daughter tells me this guy [expletive] Nico from New York is looking for people that talk like they’re from New York.” “Maybe half of the videos start off, ‘I don’t even know why I’m doing this.’’’ “Stop with this Insta-[expletive]-gram and get a real [expletive] job, will you, please?” “At first, it was tough to get people to submit. I had to beg — not beg, but I had to ask my friend, Wayne Diamond.” “Because I think I got a great [expletive] accent because I’m [expletive] great.” “And next thing you know, celebrities are submitting, like Chazz Palminteri and Debi Mazar.” “Hey, Nico.” “Kathrine Narducci.” “Hey, Nico.” “Alec Baldwin.” “Whoa.” “And I’m the judge, all right? Because if I participated in it, I would easily win.” “Myself, Princess Nokia and Michael Rapaport are the main judges. We narrowed the thousand-plus submissions to 24. Then from there, it was kind of like a March Madness-style bracket. Wiki from Manhattan …” “What’s good, y’all?” “… would go against Mero from the Bronx.” “Pump your brakes, my G, because —” “And Slik Nik the Ruler won Brooklyn.” “If you don’t use your hands when you talk, is it even a New York accent?” “Chase Money Mars won Bronx.” “Man, I had everybody talking about, they got the best New York accent and all that. I said, duh, of course —” “Yess_fierceness won Staten Island.” “And to be honest, I think I’m like the best contender.” “Wiki won Manhattan.” “You know what it is: straight Boricua, straight Irish.” “Imani Brammer won Queens.” “So I was talking to him, talking to him. I’m like, you was in my DMs last night, so [expletive] ah-ah-ah. And he was like —” “Well, everyone thinks that the second-place winner, Rob Agri, was robbed.” “For the city that never sleeps, we’re just taking a nap, but we can still be united in the way that we yap.” “I can’t say that anyone got robbed. I think, you know what? I take that back. I think Wayne Diamond got robbed.” “I mean, come on. I am a beautiful person.” “He got knocked out in the first round. But hey, what are you going to do? Charlie the Wolf went against this 9-year-old girl from Staten Island named Sienna.” “Yeah. I don’t know what coffee is. I know what ‘cawfee’ is.” “Charlie only won by 11 votes.” “I’m 74 years old and I don’t give a [expletive].” “Let’s talk about profanity.” “I think you’re a [expletive] moron.” “What the [expletive] are you doing?” “You’re [expletive] bugging, you know what I mean?” “Profanity is music, of course.” “So don’t for one second think I’m on some funny [expletive] because I can show up to your grandma’s building and smack the [expletive] out of you.” “I didn’t hear any negativity in any of this. Cursing, to me, is not a sign of negativity. Confrontation is not a sign of negativity.” “You sound like you just stepped off the [expletive] subway.” “You want a bacon, egg and [expletive] cheese?” “People have this misconception that New Yorkers are rude, and I couldn’t agree with that less. And you see it now, especially during a crisis: Everyone’s coming together to help one another.” “And not for nothing, let’s be real. You flew here and I grew here, period.” “Look, resilience is part of what made this challenge so interesting, right? There is nothing but joy in these videos.” “It’s always important to have pride for where you’re from, but now, more than ever, it’s essential.” “We’re all winners. There’s no losers here. Nothing but winners because New York forever.” “It can’t be described by no face, race or color. You just know when you hear it because it sounds like no other.” “But keep doing what y’all do, you smell me?” “And you smell New York, you feel New York, you hear New York and you love New York. Bye.” “I am very upset that I don’t have a New York accent. I really wish I did. I really wish I did.”Many entries included a little profanity; some consisted almost wholly of it — the poetry of how it’s strung together is particularly New York. Countless videos begin with a why-would-I-even-do-this disclaimer, setting a tone of exasperated pique. Almost as many insisted that their New York accents weren’t accents at all. “People tell me I have a Brooklyn accent; I don’t know what they’re tawkin’ about,” said @juliehershk’s mother. “I just tawk.”It would be impolitic to say that the New York accent is the signature American accent. You could argue, though, that the New York accent is the accent of the current crisis. It’s there in the burly roundness of the words coming out of Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s mouth, or the acidity in the tone of Dr. Anthony Fauci, or the way President Trump scrapes all of his syllables together. (Senator Bernie Sanders’s howling woof counts here, too.)For New Yorkers, that’s made the conversation around the coronavirus feel as local as the pandemic’s actual impact. Watching the news can feel like watching quarrels between grouchy neighbors.In this climate, the #BestNYAccent challenge was even more reassuring. A reminder of local resilience and stubbornness in the face of global trauma. A monument to history and place standing firm against titanic winds. A middle finger to life’s cruel dice roll.