Late Night Isn’t Buying Pence’s Reason for Not Wearing a Mask
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.Vice President Mike Pence defended himself from criticism over his failure to wear a mask while touring the Mayo Clinic this week. Pence said that since he didn’t have the coronavirus, he wanted to take the opportunity to look health care workers “in the eye and say thank you.”“But he might be OK,” Seth Meyers said Wednesday night, “because looking at him, he drinks plenty of bleach.”“Why couldn’t you just follow the rules, man? Do you think if you purse your lips hard enough the virus can’t get in?” — SETH MEYERS“And Mike, you may not have coronavirus, but that doesn’t mean you can’t spread the other diseases you do have, like, for example, rheumatoid gravititis or chronic furrowed brow or mayonnaise blood.” — SETH MEYERS“You can still look them in the eye with a mask! It’s not a blindfold.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Finally, a medical explanation for why seeing Mike Pence’s face makes you feel ill.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“By the way, for Mike Pence, ‘looking you in the eye’ is second base.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“See, he didn’t want to wear a mask because he wanted to look them in the eye and say thank you. What kind of a mask was he planning to wear, Spider-Man?” — JIMMY KIMMEL“Meanwhile, Team Trump is busy declaring victory. The president’s pretty little son-in-law was on ‘Fox and Friends’ this morning. He said the federal government ‘rose to the challenge’ and that ‘This is a great success story.’ And irony is now as dead as his eyes.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“[imitating Kushner] Yes, it’s a great story. More people dying under this administration in 100 days than died in 20 years of the Vietnam War. That’s a story that needs to be told. Perhaps in the blockbuster movie, ‘Preventable Apocalypse Now.’” — STEPHEN COLBERT“I love the idea that he’s watching late-night television to see if we make jokes about him. Jared, in case you are, here are a few I think you’ll like. Jared Kushner is so dead inside, the president calls him Melania. Jared Kushner looks like if white privilege had a baby with raw cookie dough. Jared Kushner looks like a Pez dispenser of ‘Young Sheldon.’ Even Jared from Subway is like, ‘This Jared gives me the creeps.’” — JIMMY KIMMELSamantha Bee made her case for saving the United States Postal Service on Wednesday night’s “Full Frontal.”Gov. Gavin Newsom of California will visit “Late Night with Seth Meyers” (virtually) on Thursday.