With Movie Theaters Closed, Marquees Go Viral
By Julia Carmel“You’re still here? It’s over. Go home. Go.”The final words of “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off” (1986) loom over the empty streets of Minneapolis. A quote from “Back to the Future” (1985) reminds Vancouver, Wash., that leaving the house could cause serious repercussions. A marquee in Lake Oswego, Ore., encourages the community to stream a film that the theater never had a chance to show.Think date night will be watching more news.⁦@UptownTheatre⁩ never fails. #StayHome pic.twitter.com/GezcY64isVIn mid-March, as Broadway went dark and “nonessential” businesses began to close their doors, the gravity and uncertainty of the coronavirus pandemic in the United States grew. When movie theaters closed and owners buckled down for an indefinite hiatus, some chose to leave their own messages on the way out.Traverse City State Theatre providing some light humour today while most of downtown is now closed - any other movie titles that can be changed to reflect current events?! #COVID19 pic.twitter.com/vqqxkLAYwsSome left lighthearted jokes, warping titles to create “The Social Distancing Network,” “No Close Encounters of Any Kind,” “No Corona for Old Men” and “Good Vaccine Hunting.”Others opted for more abstract references.Jordan Perry, the general manager of the Lake Theater & Cafe, initially wrote a dark parting joke for his community in Lake Oswego, Ore.“It made me chuckle when I thought of it, and then it seemed to be making a lot of people chuckle,” Mr. Perry said. “But after about two weeks of that, as we sort of settled into the groove of coronavirus, it didn’t quite speak to the outlook that I, at least, wanted Lake Oswego to walk away with.”After watching Céline Sciamma’s “Portrait of a Lady on Fire” (2019), Mr. Perry decided to change his tactic.“I had this marquee at my disposal — or the business’s marquee at my disposal — and I liked the idea of not only getting people to watch this great movie but of trying to speak in more hopeful terms,” he said.Mr. Perry, who has worked at the Lake Theater & Cafe on and off for 23 years, said the two-screen theater is both a home for his staff and a home-away-from-home for his patrons. And though digital support is no substitute for the physical community that he’s missing, it’s still nice to see people laugh.“The fact that it did catch on made me happy because it essentially showed there’s a place for more hopeful messages; that dark humor isn’t the only way we can express ourselves,” Mr. Perry said, before laughing. “It was also fun to see everybody think I was high, too.”Dan Wyatt, the owner of the Kiggins Theater in Vancouver, Wash., has also been updating his marquee to match the phases of quarantine.Following his first two messages — “Goonies never say die” and “Keep your distance, Chewie, but don’t look like you’re trying to keep your distance” — Mr. Wyatt decided to reference his favorite movie, “Back to the Future.”“Cinema was always — for me — about hope and optimism,” Mr. Wyatt said. “You always hope these marquee messages going out will resonate the same way, or create the same effect that people have while sitting together and watching a movie communally and sharing those emotions.”His single-screen theater has since caught the eye of many housebound movie fans, with Michael J. Fox — who played Marty McFly in the “Back to the Future” trilogy — reposting a photo of the marquee himself. Since then, Mr. Wyatt has tried out two new messages: A play on different Tom Cruise movies and a reference to The Princess Bride.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“I think there’s a communal experience that goes beyond the budget spectacle,” Mr. Wyatt said.“If you have a $100,000 movie theater in your home, it still does not compare to sitting elbow to elbow with people, and enjoying those experiences together,” he continued. “A comedy is going to be funnier, and an exciting adventure is going to be that much more exciting when it’s watched communally.”Matthew Viragh, the founder of The Nitehawk Prospect Park in Brooklyn, left three parting messages on the theater’s marquee when it closed on March 14. For the last two months, the front has read “Now Showing: Onward,” referencing the animated movie that debuted shortly before quarantine began.Though there’s no end in sight yet, he’s sure that the community will flock back to theaters once it’s allowed.“People really do enjoy going to the movies and getting out of their apartments and being with people in general — that’s why you live in New York, right?” Mr. Viragh said. “For all the culture, all the food, and all of the time spent with friends.”The other two sides of the Nitehawk’s marquee say “see you on the other side” and advise passers-by to “Be excellent to each other” — a message from “Bill and Ted’s Excellent Adventure” (1989) that has been written on theater marquees around the country.