‘Onward’ Review: An Expected Journey
By Ben KenigsbergWhen you purchase a ticket for an independently reviewed film through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.“Onward,” Pixar’s latest invention, begins with a bit of what is now called “world building.” The universe of this animated feature is one of elves, dragons and wizards. Unfortunately, as a prologue explains, magic is tough to learn. A flash forward illustrates how mythical creatures, lulled by the invention of light bulbs, smartphones and other technology, gradually forgot how to cast spells.Although road signs and milk cartons still use fonts suited for medieval manuscripts, “Onward” otherwise unfolds in a mostly modern, unmagical time. Unicorns fight over trash like angry raccoons. A fearsome manticore (voiced by Octavia Spencer), her questing days behind her, runs a theme restaurant and worries about lawsuits. A single mother (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) is a mighty warrior — according to the workout she watches on TV. And elves are, ears and sky-blue skin aside, much like humans. Our hero elf, Ian (voiced by Tom Holland), has just turned 16. He has the same anxieties (shyness, fears of highway driving) that might befall any high-school-age orc or hobbit.The mild, one-joke amusement of “Onward,” directed by Dan Scanlon (“Monsters University”), comes from the clash of the mundane and the fantastical. The filmmakers have clearly had fun imagining a milieu with belligerent biker sprites and cops who are centaurs or Cyclopes. (One, voiced by Lena Waithe, is revealed to be in a same-sex parenting arrangement, in a moment that has already drawn praise for its casualness.)The adventure itself is almost an afterthought. It concerns Ian and his hopelessly uncool older brother, Barley (Chris Pratt), a connoisseur of the old lore. Ian, for his birthday, is given a staff and a spell that the brothers’ dead father left for them. The spell is supposed to bring their dad back to life for one day, but it only partly comes off, leaving him as just a pair of sentient pants and shoes. The boys, intermittently disguising the body with “Weekend at Bernie’s”-style puppetry and clothes that might have suited the original invisible man, embark on a mission to conjure the rest of him.While the story of “Onward” is personal for Scanlon, whose father died when he was young, Ian and Barley’s journey plays as disappointingly routine, a checklist of mechanically foreshadowed heart-to-hearts and lessons learned, leavened by the occasional offbeat sight gag. (The movie will teach viewers the perils of gelatinous cubes, and the design of the final dragon is a hoot.) What is missing are the unexpected flights of fancy on which Pixar forged its reputation — breathtaking, tempo-altering sequences like the fire-extinguisher ballet of “WALL-E,” or the refreshingly adult perspective of “Up.”Given the movie’s nostalgia for bygone eras and analog game-playing, “Onward” might have shown more nerve if it had been a rare foray from Pixar into hand-drawn animation. As it is, the film is a brightly rendered, sentimental ode to adolescence that hits all the right emotional buttons, even as it risks being forgotten itself.Onward