Travis McCready Concert Is Postponed, but Not Happily
By Graham BowleyThe Arkansas authorities Thursday seized the liquor license of a concert hall planning what had been billed as the first major rock concert since the pandemic, forcing the promoters to delay the show, which was originally scheduled for Friday in Fort Smith.A day earlier the state Department of Health issued a cease-and-desist order to the promoter, Temple Live, anticipating that it intended to violate state rules governing the reopening of concerts. The promoters said they were applying to reschedule the concert, featuring Travis McCready, a country-rock singer, for just a few days later, Monday, May 18, at Temple Live.The promoters denounced what they characterized as a pre-emptive, and heavy-handed enforcement action while, they said, negotiations were ongoing.“‘We the people,’ three amazing words, and they have been trampled on today,” Mike Brown, a representative of Temple Live, said at a televised news conference.Gov. Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas said that the concert failed to meet the state’s public health directives for live concerts. The challenge had attracted national attention because the show was seen as a potential test of whether fans were ready to return to live musical events after the coronavirus brought the concert industry to a halt in March.Starting Monday, May 18, the governor is allowing indoor venues such as theaters, arenas and stadiums to reopen in Arkansas, but he had insisted that audiences be limited to fewer than 50 people. Temple Live had planned on more than four times that number of fans — 229 — in the 1,100-seat theater for the concert, which was scheduled for just three days before the relaxed guidelines took effect.Promoters had remained defiant this week, accusing the state authorities of discrimination because churches were already allowed to open, with social distancing requirements but without limits to the number of people attending. “We are not trying to be difficult,” Mr. Brown told reporters on Wednesday. “We just want to be treated fairly and with respect.” Mr. Brown said tickets for the Friday show would be honored on Monday.He had asked the authorities to provide scientific evidence that the virus could be more easily transmitted at a concert than a church. In public comments Wednesday, a health department official said the concert was different because people would be attending from different states and so coming into contact with people they would not normally encounter.Attention is now likely to shift to another concert the promoter is planning involving Mr. McCready, scheduled for Saturday in Pineville, Mo., about two hours away.That concert is to be held outdoors at the Tall Pines Distillery where the audience is being limited to 400 people. The setting for the concert is an eight-acre field, which organizers said will make it relatively straightforward to meet social distancing requirements.The organizers said local health authorities had not raised any questions about the event. Officials at the mayor’s office in Pineville and at the McDonald County department of health in Missouri did not immediately return requests for comment. Missouri officials are allowing concerts as long as social distancing and other precautions are observed.Authorities and music industry executives around the country are increasingly having conversations about timetables for reopening music venues. In Wisconsin, venues faced a question of how soon they could be ready to host concerts after the state Supreme Court on Wednesday voted to reject the extension of the state’s stay-at-home order.Bruce Peterson, a concert promoter in Wisconsin, said that most of the larger venues he works with have already resigned themselves to staying closed for the summer. That’s because planning and booking musical acts typically takes six to nine months, and, with the aura of uncertainty still prevailing in the state, it’s difficult for venues to make commitments at this point.But some smaller venues were already making plans to reopen. The Saloon on Calhoun With Bacon, a music hall outside Milwaukee with a capacity of less than 400, is preparing to reopen on May 20. Dave Dayler, the owner, said the Saloon’s first live musical performance would be on May 23; he said he planned to keep visitors far from the musicians onstage, check temperatures at the door and follow whatever limitations local authorities impose.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“We want to do this right,” he said.In Arkansas, the health department cease-and-desist order was issued Wednesday. But on Thursday, the governor seemed receptive to the event’s going forward at a later date, even though the promoters had not shaved the planned attendance. The governor’s office said that under the new guidelines, a venue can reopen with more than 50 people as long as it is less than a third full. The governor noted, however, that the application for the new date would still need the approval of state health officials.The pressure on the promoters had increased Thursday when the Arkansas Alcoholic Beverage Control Administration suspended Temple Live’s alcohol permit. “We did pick up the actual permit this morning,” a department spokesman, Scott Hardin, said.The promoters said they had been told the permit would be returned now that they have canceled the May 15 show.Providing a glimpse of how concerts might change in the Covid-19 era, Temple Live had said it would be protecting concertgoers’ safety with precautions such as taking their temperatures when they arrived, directing them along one-way walkways, requiring face masks, reducing the numbers below the theater’s capacity and seating people apart in “pods,” or small gatherings, restricted to friends and relatives who are comfortable together.Arkansas has recorded 4,366 cases of coronavirus, and 98 deaths.