Tree-Planting Trump Is an Expert at Digging Holes, Colbert Says
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.President Trump and the first lady planted a tree at the White House on Wednesday in celebration of Earth Day.“We’re doing something I love doing: planting trees,” Trump told reporters. “‘I’ve always loved it.” Stephen Colbert poked fun on Wednesday night’s “A Late Show,” saying, “Yes, two things Donald Trump has definitely always loved: manual labor and the thing where fruit comes from.”“Donald Trump celebrated Earth Day today with a shovel. The president, first lady and Mike and Karen Pence gathered on the South Lawn to dig a hole to bury his hair in.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“Look at how natural — so they are doing physical labor in their suits and heels. Melania is praying right now they don’t dig too close to her escape tunnel.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“Trump finally got around to actually planting the tree. Here he is getting his exercise for the decade. [imitating Trump] ‘I’ve gotten a lot of practice at my press conferences. Every day, I just dig that hole deeper and deeper and deeper.’” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Today is the 50th Earth Day. You can tell Earth Day turned 50 because earlier today, Earth changed its hairstyle and bought a Corvette.” — JIMMY FALLON“The big 5-0. And I gotta say, Earth is still looking good. She’s just getting hotter every year, even with the receding glaciers and putting on a little water weight around the coastline.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“And you know, honestly, you gotta admit, man, Earth is having the best Earth Day ever. Because ever since coronavirus locked all of us in our homes, animals have been roaming free, the smog has cleared from the sky, the waters of Venice are blue again. Basically, as bad as coronavirus has been for humans, it’s been amazing for the Earth. In fact, I don’t want to be a conspiracy theorist, but isn’t Wuhan a part of the Earth?” — TREVOR NOAH“And Earth is having kind of a moment right now because, with people staying home, the Earth is turning wilder and cleaner, with reduced CO2, better air quality, and animals roaming the city streets. Turns out the best present for Earth Day is the best present for Mother’s Day: time away from her children. Just get all the unruly humans out of her hair so Mother Earth can sit in a bubble bath and watch ‘Outlander.’” — STEPHEN COLBERTGov. Andrew Cuomo of New York appeared on “The Daily Social Distancing Show” Wednesday night where he told Trevor Noah about his Tuesday meeting with President Trump.Bill Gates will pop up to chat with Stephen Colbert on Thursday night’s “A Late Show.”