‘Parks and Recreation’ Reunion: Isolate Yo’ Self
TV’s best best friends return in a sweet, goofy special that embodies the show’s philosophy: that community helps us survive.By James PoniewozikThe 2015 finale of “Parks and Recreation,” the NBC comedy set in a small-town bureaucracy, took place in the future. I would not suggest that you watch it right now. I say that not so much as a judgment of its quality but because its vision of the years it flash-forwarded to — from 2017 to 2048 — is, in retrospect, painfully optimistic.Things turn out for the best. People of different political beliefs get along. Characters find noble work in public service. There are no controversies over the wisdom of injecting bleach. Noticeably, the finale skips over the year 2020. (It does, presciently, mention an economic downturn somewhere before 2022.)Thursday’s “Parks and Recreation” special on NBC takes place in a future that the late-Obama-era finale couldn’t imagine: our anxiety-ridden, pandemic-isolated present. Yet it may have been more uplifting than the finale’s wildly happy endings, because we needed it more at this moment.The episode, written by a team of seven including the co-creator Michael Schur, leans into the philosophy that powered the series: That friendship is not just a nice thing that generates laughs but an essential ingredient of a functioning society.The engine of the special, of course, is Leslie Knope (Amy Poehler), who during the series’s run was always That Friend — the one who engineered scavenger hunts and waffle breakfasts and overelaborate goodbye tributes. Her devotion to her gruff former boss, Ron Swanson (Nick Offerman), and her best friend, Ann Perkins (Rashida Jones), bordered on zealotry. She would take a bullet for them.Now the bullet she has to take is not being around them, except by video conferencing. (The in-world Zoom equivalent being, of course, Gryzzl.) So she and her congressman husband, Ben Wyatt (Adam Scott), have turned their energy to advocating for people to connect with friends and focus on their emotional health. Which is exactly the therapy this half-hour offers.The most hilarious moments end up coming from the supporting characters that populated Pawnee, Ind., who make up almost as vast a sitcom universe as Springfield in “The Simpsons.” (The bits with Mo Collins’s stir-crazy local talk show host Joan Callamezzo and Jay Jackson’s news anchor Perd Hapley are a reminder that, among other things, “Parks” was a sharp sendup of the media.)As the special round-robins among the regular cast, the laughs are more of the gentle, I-wonder-what-X-would-do-in-quarantine variety. Andy Dwyer (Chris Pratt) has accidentally locked himself in his shed; for the libertarian woodsman Ron, isolation is like coming home: “I’ve been practicing social distancing since I was 4 years old.”Even catching up with our old pals bumps us up against grim reality. Ann is in Ann Arbor volunteering as a nurse in outpatient care. Andy, in his children’s-entertainer persona Johnny Karate, tries to assure kids that things will get back to normal, but loses the thread: “It might never happen. But it will eventually.” (He speaks for us all.)Producing a very special episode of a beloved show in response to a crisis can always be dicey — the less said about the post-9/11 “West Wing” one-off, “Isaac and Ishmael,” the better. For a drama today, the risk would be sanctimony or mawkishness. For a comedy it’s that, well, a deadly plague is not funny.There is definitely an uneasy undercurrent in the “Parks” special, as there is now in every remote late-night show interview and Zoom-call sketch. The reason for all those toilet-paper and home-schooling jokes, after all, is the fear of disease and death. Throughout new TV today, it’s the unspoken realities that often ring the loudest.So is “Parks and Recreation” too light and sunny to deal with this moment? It may be the classic comedy that’s just light and sunny enough — in part because that lightness has always been grounded, however subtly, in reality.“Parks,” after all, began during a crisis. It premiered in April 2009, the arduous spring of the Great Recession. Its first short season focused on a plan to convert an open pit into a park — the sort of “shovel-ready” project local governments were seeking out to spend stimulus money. The hard times were rarely mentioned but always implicit. (“Now things have changed. People need our help. And it feels good to be needed,” Leslie says, as she rousts a sleeping drunk from a playground slide.)Even fans tend to remember the show most for the goofs and inventions that came in the later seasons: Galentine’s Day, Li’l Sebastian the minihorse, The Cones of Dunshire, “Treat yo’ self!” But that first season was necessary. The show’s ethos was that communities need to come together because that’s the only way you get past really bad things.The “Parks” special is not political — it breezes over the fact that Leslie, a feminist and Joe Biden stan, is probably not the most comfortable fit in Donald Trump’s Interior Department. The series itself, though set in government, was rarely partisan.It was, however, extremely political in an everyday sense, as an embodiment of the idea that societies work best as partnerships, not as competitions of individuals.And that’s exactly the sense in which the pandemic is political, down to the simple mechanics of transmission and prevention. It’s not: I wear my mask so I can be safe. It’s: I wear my mask so you can be safe, and you wear yours so I can be. We give up seeing each other, for each other. (For now, anyway. The real-life stay-at-home order in Indiana is set to expire Friday.)It’s this poignant dynamic — showing you care by cutting yourself off — that “Parks” was especially well-suited to deal with. You could imagine the characters of, say, “Seinfeld” living quite happily alone, as long as the cereal didn’t run out. Somewhere in Arlen, Tex., Hank Hill and his neighbors could still be stoically having a beer in the alley, only six feet apart.But the “Parks” gang were the best best friends on TV. You know how it must ache for Leslie to worry about her essential-worker confidante Ann in another state, for Tom Haverford (Aziz Ansari) and Donna Meagle (Retta) to settle for clinking glasses virtually.This made for a better kind of very special episode. “Parks” didn’t return for half an hour to tell us what to think; it helped us feel what we feel.