Trump Believes He’s Invincible, Trevor Noah Says
Not only is the president continuing to forgo masks, Noah said, but Trump also did something “he is usually too afraid to do — an interview with someone who doesn’t work at Fox News.”By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. We’re all stuck at home at the moment, so here are the 50 best movies on Netflix right now.On Tuesday, President Trump paid a visit to Arizona, where he went without a mask while visiting a Honeywell mask factory and said the White House would soon dissolve its coronavirus task force. Trevor Noah noted on Wednesday night’s “Daily Social Distancing Show” that the president must have been feeling invincible, because he “did something he is usually too afraid to do — an interview with someone who doesn’t work at Fox News.”During an interview with ABC News on Tuesday night, Trump told David Muir that he had decided to keep the task force in operation. He also said that he believed more American deaths would be possible as the country began to reopen, and that grieving families would be happy with the economic results.“That’s right, for Trump, the priority right now isn’t to try to stop the pandemic; it’s to open up the country no matter what. I mean, how can you get rid of the task force fighting the pandemic while the pandemic is still growing? That makes no sense. Can you imagine if they stopped after ‘Fast and Furious 6?’ How would we know how much more furious they get?” — TREVOR NOAH“[imitating Trump] What I’m trying to say is, yeah, a lot of people are going to die, and I am washing my hands of it.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“That is colder than the caves of Pluto. Imagine that obituary: ‘He is survived by two sons, a granddaughter, and a raging economy. He would be rich if he wasn’t dead. Rest in profits.’” — STEPHEN COLBERT“I’m struck by how calm and casually he talks about the loss of life. It’s like he’s changed his re-election campaign from ‘Keep America Great’ to ‘Kill Americans? Groovy!’” — STEPHEN COLBERT“In that interview, President Trump said that as states relax stay-at-home orders during the coronavirus pandemic, there may be more death, because, quote, ‘You won’t be locked into an apartment or a house or whatever it is.’ I know he’s out of touch, but is it possible he doesn’t even know what people live in? [as Trump] ‘I think they make nests out of mud or something. I could ask them, but I really don’t want to interact.’” — SETH MEYERS“Now, there was so much backlash for disbanding this task force, that this morning, Trump announced that he would not be disbanding the task force. He said he would allow the task force to continue, just with different people doing different things, which makes as much sense as telling your husband you’re not divorcing him, you’re just continuing your marriage with a different person who you don’t hate.” — TREVOR NOAH“[as Trump] Turns out people like people who want them to be alive. That one really caught me by surprise, because I’m dead inside.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Of course, this is Donald Trump, which means it’ll end when he finds a younger, hotter task force.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Now, Trump has claimed this is all Obama’s fault, because when Trump came into office, there were no tests for this disease that didn’t exist yet.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Yeah, according to Trump, he spent three years not preparing for a pandemic because he was distracted by all the scandals he created. Even if Trump did have a lot going on, you gotta admit that’s a [expletive] excuse. You’re the president — that’s kind of the nature of the job. [as Trump] ‘Whoa, whoa, whoa! I just wanted to run the country. I didn’t know I’d have to multitask.’” — TREVOR NOAH“[as Trump] I’ve got a lot of things going on. I mean, between the golf and the tweeting and the pardoning the turkeys, I got a lot on my plate, Dave. By the way, keep your grubby fingers away from my plate. You reach for my nachos, you’re drawing back a bloody stump.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“No, you don’t — all you do is watch TV, and whenever your aides let you out of your straitjacket, tweet. And when you’re not golfing, you’re tweeting about golfing.” — SETH MEYERSOn this week’s “Full Frontal,” Samantha Bee highlights the precautions America should have taken long before Covid-19.Laura Linney will virtually appear on Thursday’s “The Late Late Show” with James Corden.