Is Your Office Closed? Compensate With a Workplace Comedy
A writer asks the minds behind “Veep,” “Brooklyn Nine-Nine” and other office comedies to join her in pondering what makes the genre so great — and so vital during a pandemic.By Alexis SoloskiTo begin, a confession: My husband, an essential worker, goes to an office every weekday. He walks about a mile, navigating the sidewalks like a player in some virus-inflected Frogger game, and rides a lonely elevator to an empty 10th floor suite. A staggered schedule guarantees that he works alone — which means no pleasantries, no gossip, no box of doughnuts in the kitchenette just because. And even the thought of this office — bereft, doughnut-less — makes me extremely jealous.Though my working life has included office jobs only sporadically, my mind has been cycling, wistfully, compulsively, through past workplaces — the grimy kitchenette at the Village Voice, the beauty closet at Teen Vogue, the cubicle hedge maze of Columbia’s English department. The other day, I noticed my 3-year-old son playing a game on the tablet called Toca Life: Office. The game map includes a whiteboard and a unisex toilet. Characters can photocopy their own butts. I felt misty.If I’m honest with myself, my actual experience of office work was often tedious, the offices themselves dingy, relationships with colleagues clumsy and strained. Who likes a commute? Or a Tupperware lunch? Or an ergonomic chair that clearly isn’t?But working and parenting require different skills, and trying to do them both, at the same time and in the same place, is insane-making. I miss my office self: capable, better dressed, less inclined to yell at shorter colleagues. The idea of having an office to go to — an office that doesn’t double as a kitchen table and is only rarely smeared with peanut butter — feels like obscene luxury.Dan Goor, who worked on the genius workplace sitcom “Parks and Recreation” and cocreated “Brooklyn Nine-Nine,” expressed similar nostalgia.“Sitting around in a room full of comedy writers laughing at all the funny things they say without having a mask on, that’s probably what I miss most,” Goor said when we spoke a few weeks ago. I talked to him and several other workplace comedy showrunners about what makes their genre so superb. They can’t go to their offices either, so they were all around. And most of them, like me, had small children at home.“I’ve just been editing on Zoom every day while my child screams outside the door,” said Tracey Wigfield, of the canceled-too-soon “Great News.”But I can’t tell anymore if I miss actual offices or if I have watched so many office comedies that I have deluded myself into believing that offices are fun.Ever since I was allowed to wield a remote, I have loved workplace sitcoms and hated family ones. In the ’80 and ’90s, office comedies and family comedies had the same multicamera setup and unvarying cast. But “Designing Women,” “Night Court” and “Cheers” seemed expansive. Family comedies — “Growing Pains,” “Family Ties,” “Full House” — felt squirmier, claustrophobic.Just after college, when I moved to New York to do copy editing and data entry and an entirely negligible amount of acting, I imagined I would pass my evenings two-finger-typing a novel or workshopping new plays. Instead I spent most weeknights spackled to the orange velvet sofa I had bought at a shady Coney Island resale emporium, watching wall-to-wall “NewsRadio” reruns. (Phil Hartman. Maura Tierney. David Foley. Stephen Root. Did any ’90s show have a better ensemble? And how has Joe Rogan become the relevant one?)Now, at night, when I’m too debilitated from child care to write anything more coherent than a “K! Thx!” text, I have been watching workplace comedies again: new episodes of “Brooklyn Nine-Nine,” past seasons of “Parks and Recreation” and “The Good Place” (a stealth workplace comedy) and the latest season of “Younger,” which is both a romantic comedy and an office comedy and therefore perfect. Onscreen at least, I can enjoy the company of co-workers. Co-workers with adult routines and adult problems and takeout coffee and pants that button. What unattainable bliss.Most of the showrunners I spoke with agreed that the secret to a great workplace comedy — beyond having actual workplaces in which to write, film and edit it — was the opportunity it provides to cram dissimilar characters into a relatively small space and force them to talk to each other.“A family show, they’re literally family, and an ensemble friends shows, they’re with each other because they just enjoy each other,” said Justin Spitzer of “Superstore.” “Workplace comedies bring together a group of very disparate people who don’t necessarily want to be together.” Difference generates conflict, and conflict creates comedy.Goor — blowing my mind — suggested that all office comedies are also family comedies, in that family dynamics inevitably infiltrate the workplace. Then he walked the claim back. “I guess the romance part isn’t in a functional family,” he said.Armando Iannucci, of “Veep” and “Avenue 5,” argued that rather than mirroring families, offices provide microcosms of power politics. “There’s a hierarchy in terms of who’s boss and who wants to be boss,” he said. (As “Veep” was set largely inside the White House, that cosm isn’t always so micro.) His current show, “Avenue 5,” about tourists and staff trapped aboard a spaceship, invites its own political comparisons.“We are very much aware we’re writing a show about people trapped indoors fighting for survival under terrible leadership,” he said. (The series was renewed in February for a second season; Iannucci doesn’t know when shooting can begin.)The occasional Scranton-based paper company aside, the choice of office matters, Wigfield told me. “Depending on what your workplace is, there are often built-in stakes,” she said. A newsroom or a spaceship or an experimental wing of the afterlife drive stories.Stories don’t arrive as easily when you have to dream them on Zoom, showrunners told me. “Comedy is about blurting things out and being heard and timing,” Goor said, “and those things all feel hard to do over Zoom.” He spoke plaintively of the communal lunches and couches at his now-shuttered office and a writing process that “puts you at great risk of inhaling somebody’s aerosol droplets.”Iannucci also had mixed Zoom-related feelings. “It’s not quite the same,” Iannucci said. Wigfield, whose responsibilities right now include a toddler, a newborn and a “Saved by the Bell” reboot, found it lacking, too.“Or maybe it’s just tricky to come up with jokes in the middle of a pandemic,” she said.As a kid, I watched workplace comedies for clues about what adult life was and could be. The settings weren’t especially glamorous. Neither were the characters (Julia Sugarbaker excepted), but they presaged a time in which I could choose my own work, my own skirt suits. I wonder what a pandemic episode would have looked like and what it would have taught me.“We could’ve done a great episode,” Spitzer said of “Superstore.” “And I could have shorted the market. But you can’t live in retrospect.”Of course, after weeks of school closure, home does increasingly resemble an office, with designated work spaces, something resembling a routine, the occasional video call that makes me put on a bra. Last month, an old printer broke, and I bought a new one with a scanner function. Now we can copy our butts right here. A dark lesson of late capitalism and Covid-19: Everywhere is an office, any hour a work hour. Is any of this funny?Another lesson: Maybe you don’t actually need a workplace to make a workplace comedy. Late last month, I watched the “Parks and Recreation” reunion, a benefit for Feeding America. Though the 2015 series finale had sent most of the characters spiraling away from Pawnee, Ind., the reunion’s premise had them reaching out, via the fictional Gryzzl platform, for mid-pandemic check-ins.