12 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.A. SAVAGE at the Sultan Room (Feb. 17, 8 p.m.). When the band Parquet Courts first broke onto New York’s indie-rock scene, their ambling, cryptic lyrics amplified their slouchy brand of Brooklyn cool. But over time, the group’s approach grew more direct — a shift that is reflected in the solo work of their frontman, Andrew Savage. Released in 2017, his debut album under the name A. Savage is a collection of pensive and earnest songs about love and political strife. Complete with pedal steel embellishments and paeans to “Ladies From Houston,” the music bears the influence of Savage’s native Texas as much as the New York scene with which he is associated.thesultanroom.comTHE BK DRIP at Kings Theater (Feb. 16, 8 p.m.). This opulent theater in Flatbush, Brooklyn, will offer a suitable setting for a decadent lineup that brings together some of rap’s strongest emerging voices. Among them are Polo G, an ambassador of Chicago’s hard-edge drill scene who has recently embraced a more melodic approach, and Sheff G, who is credited with bringing the distinctive subgenre from the Midwest to Brooklyn. Both he and fellow Brooklynite Pop Smoke will perform in their home borough for the first time since they were removed from Rolling Loud’s bill at Citi Field in October at the request of the New York City Police Department. Melii, the bilingual Harlem-based rapper, will do her part to balance out the testosterone-fueled bill.718-856-5464, kingstheatre.comEARTHGANG at Gramercy Theater (Feb. 14, 9 p.m.). Viral hit-making and overnight celebrity are common narratives for today’s rap stars; the pace of this Atlanta-based pair’s rise seems glacial by comparison. The duo of Johnny Venus and Doctur Dot met as high school students in 2008, and in the intervening years, they’ve developed a distinctive and eclectic style that splices together soul, psychedelia and classic Southern hip-hop. The past decade served as a long runway to Earthgang’s major-label debut, “Mirrorland,” released on J. Cole’s Dreamville imprint in September. Currently on tour behind the record, Earthgang will be at Warsaw in Brooklyn on Thursday and Gramercy in Manhattan on Friday. Both shows are sold out, but resale tickets are available.212-614-6932, thegramercytheatre.comPUSS N BOOTS at Rough Trade NYC (Feb. 14, 8:30 p.m.) and Bowery Ballroom (Feb. 15, 8 p.m.). Across her nearly two decades as a mainstay of the adult contemporary sector, Norah Jones has shown herself to be a willing collaborator, appearing on songs with everyone from Dolly Parton to Outkast. One of Jones’s most enduring musical partnerships, though, is with the musicians Sasha Dobson and Catherine Popper, with whom she performs in the alt-country group Puss n Boots. In 2014, the trio released “No Fools, No Fun,” a debut flavored by folksy, fingerpicked guitar, close harmonies and, of course, Jones’s signature silky coo. After a few years of relative inactivity, Puss n Boots will release their sophomore album on Friday and perform in Brooklyn on the same evening. The following night, they will appear in Manhattan.roughtradenyc.commercuryeastpresents.com/boweryballroomJILL SCOTT at Radio City Music Hall (Feb. 20, 8 p.m.). Long before “empowerment core” had a name, or Lizzo as its de facto spokeswoman, this Philadelphia-born singer was operating in a similarly enlightened space — though her hits were noticeably lower octane. “Who Is Jill Scott? Words and Sounds Vol. 1,” her debut album from 2000, offered leisurely R&B meditations on romance and self-love for the everywoman, including “One Is the Magic #,” a bright, trumpet-laced jam on which Scott basks in solitude. “Who Is Jill Scott?” will turn 20 this summer; in honor of the occasion, Scott kicked off an anniversary tour earlier this month. Her stop at Radio City is sold out, but for fans eager to hear her play the album front to back, verified resale tickets are still available. 212-465-6000, radiocity.com[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]SHRINES at National Sawdust (Feb. 19, 8 p.m.). This chameleonic performer’s efforts over the past decade have been intriguing if somewhat scattershot. After establishing herself in Berlin under the moniker Erving (her full name is Carrie Erving), then moving to Brooklyn and starting the indie band Ponyhof, she is now producing spectral electro-pop as Shrines. Erving’s musical sources are similarly diffuse, her sound reflecting the influence of German techno, chamber pop and Sean-nós, a traditional style of singing that she studied while earning her master’s degree in Ireland. On “Release,” Shrines’s debut EP from November, her languid vocals, laid atop crisp programmed drums and lush strings, are spellbinding.646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org OLIVIA HORNJOANNE BRACKEEN AND UGONNA OKEGWO at Mezzrow (Feb. 14-15, 7:30 and 9 p.m.). A leading composer and pianist in jazz since the 1970s, Brackeen has a piano style based in neatly angled patterns and harmonies, and darting melodicism. She keeps your ear chasing her notes in many directions, even while the center of gravity remains firm and rhythmically grounded. A National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master, Brackeen appears here with Okegwo, a stalwart upright bassist who has accompanied some of jazz’s finest bandleaders.mezzrow.comVINICIUS CANTUARIA AND JESSE HARRIS DUO at the Iridium (Feb. 18, 8 p.m.). With his hushed strum on the guitar and his low croon — both insular and inviting — Cantuaria is an excellent match for the songbook of Antonio Carlos Jobim, whose music he covered on his most recent album, “Vinicius Canta Antonio Carlos Jobim.” These qualities also make him a logical partner for Jesse Harris, the guitarist and vocalist best known for his collaborations with Norah Jones (he wrote her breakout hit, “Don’t Know Why”).212-582-2121, theiridium.comJOHN ELLIS AND ANDY BRAGEN at the Jazz Gallery (Feb. 14-15, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). It has been over 10 years since Ellis, a saxophonist and clarinetist, and Bragen, a playwright, debuted “The Ice Siren,” a “jazz opera” that in fact owes as much to modern Western classical as it does to jazz. Next month the opera — one of three long-form collaborations that Ellis and Bragen have produced — will finally be released as an album. This concert celebrates that fact, as well as the 25th anniversary of the Jazz Gallery, which commissioned “The Ice Siren.” Ellis will perform the work with an 11-piece group featuring the vocalists Gretchen Parlato and Miles Griffith, and conducted by the trombonist J. C. Sanford.646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nycBILL FRISELL at the Blue Note (Feb. 18-23, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). Each of the ensembles Frisell has in store for this six-day run promises something rewarding. The challenge is deciding which to pick. For the first two nights, this folk-inflected experimental guitar hero will play in a trio with two of his frequent collaborators, the bassist Thomas Morgan and the drummer Kenny Wollesen. On Feb. 20-21, he will be in duet with the expert trumpeter Ambrose Akinmusire, and from Feb. 22 to 23 he will present a quintet featuring Akinmusire, Wollesen, the saxophonist Greg Tardy and the bassist Tony Scherr.212-475-8592, bluenote.netMWENSO & THE SHAKES at National Sawdust (Feb. 20, 8 p.m.). Hailing from Sierra Leone by way of England, the vocalist Michael Mwenso is undaunted by the tall task ahead of anyone running what’s nearly a full-on performance revue of the sort that dominated American stages 100 years ago. You’re dealing in music, dance, inspirational storytelling, comedy; in terms of the entertainment and the message to be delivered, that’s basically promising it all. Mwenso is up to the challenge; he sings and banters like a carnival barker at a swingers’ club, and he has a plucky young crew to support him. The Shakes include the dulcet-tongued South African vocalist Vuyo Sotashe, the tap dancer and vocalist Michela Marino Lerman, the tenor saxophonists Julian Lee and Ruben Fox, the keyboardist Mathis Picard, the bassist Russell Hall and the drummer Kyle Poole.646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org