How ‘Never Rarely Sometimes Always’ Answers Tough Questions
The writer and director Eliza Hittman narrates a sequence from her film.transcriptHi. My name is Eliza Hittman. And I am the writer and director of ‘Never Rarely Sometimes Always.’ “I want to spend a few minutes talking with you about your relationships, O.K.? Because they can affect your health. Did you know that?” The scene that you’re watching an excerpt from is the pivotal scene of the entire film. The main character— her name is Autumn. The actor’s name is Sidney Flanigan— has finally reached Planned Parenthood in Brooklyn. And she is going through her intake questionnaire with a counselor before she has an abortion. The scene is shot actually at Margaret Sanger, which is a Planned Parenthood on Bleecker Street. And that level of authenticity was really important for me in shooting the film. And the actress, Sidney Flanigan, is doing the scene not with another actor, but with an actual counselor named Kelly Chapman who I met doing research for the film. “Always.” “Why are you asking me this?” “I want to make sure that you’re safe.” The shooting style of the scene was very simple, intentionally so. I didn’t want to do anything stagy to get in the way of the intimacy of the questions that are being asked. “Your partner has hit you, slapped you, or physically hurt you. Never, rarely, sometimes, always.” So we went for a very stripped down, minimal approach. We used two cameras. One is frontal on Sidney, and one is actually 3/4 profile. And those two cameras were pushed very, very, very close to her. Because we wanted to trap her a little bit to intensify the emotions of the scene. “It’s just a couple more questions, all right?” I spent a lot of time rehearsing the scene, because it was so important. And on the day that we shot, I took Sidney aside. Because, sometimes, when you work on an independent film set, it’s a little like being on a construction site. And I wanted to quarantine her away from all of the commotion. And I found a private office for her to sit in. And she sat for several hours. And I remember, I came in, and she said, I’m ready, let’s do it. And the scene that is in the film, it’s actually the first take. Then after she did it, she said it was cathartic, and she couldn’t do it again. - Has anyone forced you into a sexual act ever in your lifetime? Yes or no.By Mekado MurphyIn “Anatomy of a Scene,” we ask directors to reveal the secrets that go into making key scenes in their movies. See new episodes in the series each Friday. You can also watch our collection of more than 150 videos on YouTube and subscribe to our YouTube channel.A series of questions posed to a young woman at an abortion clinic takes an emotional toll in the drama “Never Rarely Sometimes Always,” written and directed by Eliza Hittman and now available on demand.The main character, Autumn, played by Sidney Flanigan, has traveled from her home in Pennsylvania to New York City to seek an abortion. At a Planned Parenthood clinic, a social worker (Kelly Chapman, an actual counselor Hittman met doing research for the film) goes over a list of questions, mainly about her relationships, with four possible responses: never, rarely, sometimes or always. That questioning becomes increasingly more taxing for Autumn as the scene progresses.In this video, Hittman talks about the way the scene was rehearsed, how she isolated her lead actress on the set before shooting, and why she kept the image simple (primarily a one-take shot trained on Autumn’s face).Read the “Never Rarely Sometimes Always” review.