Really Seeing Marmee: Oh, How ‘Little Women’s’ Matriarch Has Changed
By Kathryn ShattuckFans of Greta Gerwig’s “Little Women” can’t stopping talking about it: Marmee March’s confession to her headstrong daughter Jo that “I’m angry nearly every day of my life.”It’s a line that had never been spoken on film, and only once in a television mini-series. And to those of us who’d buried Louisa May Alcott’s novel about four rambunctious Civil War-era sisters deep in our cobwebbed memories, it sounded unfamiliar and almost shocking.Even Gerwig has said she felt like she hadn’t heard it before reading the book again as an adult.But that line — and the chord it has struck with audiences — is one of the things Laura Dern, who plays Marmee in Gerwig’s adaptation, told me she’s happiest about.“I was really grateful for that scene, because I think the availability of Marmee as a mother is about something raw and about expressing what isn’t working with how women are treated or measured,” she said. “We felt it was essential.”Saintly and serene. Insipid and sexless. Or even smarmy Marmee, depending on whom you ask. Her name summons up an unsettling gamut of reactions, none of them exactly flattering. Because somewhere between the page and the screen, Marmee became easy to overlook.Adolescent readers tend to be spellbound by the March girls’ aspirations and high jinks, not the inner life of their mother (eye roll). And early movie adaptations, directed by men and catering to social norms of virtuous, self-sacrificing womanhood, rendered Marmee cloying and flat. It’s an association she still can’t quite shake — and that threatens to suffocate actresses in sticky sweetness.Which is why her admission of intentionally suppressed anger in the newest Oscar-nominated adaptation “is so important, because it tells us about so many mothers’ experiences, but also about the real woman behind Marmee,” said Anne Boyd Rioux, the author of “Meg, Jo, Beth, Amy: The Story of ‘Little Women’ and Why It Still Matters.”That real woman was Louisa’s own mother, the long-suffering Abigail May Alcott. Born into Boston prosperity, she fell hard for Bronson Alcott, a penniless dreamer whose progressive visions of education and social reform mirrored her own. But Bronson, for all his charms, turned out to be a notoriously poor provider — abandoning her for long stretches without money or a permanent home while she raised four daughters as essentially a single mother.The low point was Fruitlands, Bronson’s ill-fated utopian community (the rules: no heated baths, no animal products or labor, no sex). There, the men philosophized and then went traveling, leaving Abigail and her girls to harvest the crops.“It was this romantic dream — hippie-ish, bizarre, not anything like the bourgeois dream — of a young man who would allow her to be this full person who could write or teach or work,” said the author Eve LaPlante. Dern used LaPlante’s books “Marmee & Louisa: The Untold Story of Louisa May Alcott and Her Mother” and “My Heart Is Boundless: Writings of Abigail May Alcott, Louisa’s Mother” in her research. LaPlante added, “Bronson wasn’t that guy because he couldn’t make a living. He got fired from every job he ever had. He wasn’t stable at all.”A suffragist, abolitionist and social worker, Abigail wielded a sly wit: “I wish women displayed more brains and less jewelry”; “In this world of folly and fashion ... a man’s hat is the most essential part of his head.” And her generosity was legend.But beneath the sunshine, bitterness simmered. “She was the epitome of the phrase, ‘No good deed goes unpunished,’” said John Matteson, the author of the Pulitzer Prize-winning “Eden’s Outcasts: The Story of Louisa May Alcott and Her Father.”“That’s what makes portraying Marmee so complicated,” he said. “On the surface she seems to be this sweet, loving, encouraging, kind woman. But when she lets the mask slip, you realize that she is fiercely angry with the fact that the world doesn’t repay that kindness.”Alcott idealized Marmee as “Little Women’s” moral center and lodestar — guiding her daughters’ development, nurturing their talents and encouraging their ambitions. Even if she wavers on her own ambitions for them.“I see it as a kind of reparative gesture on Louisa’s part,” said Sarah Blackwood, who recently wrote about the Marmee problem for The New Yorker. “I think she creates a sentimental, idealized home, because she’s trying to write something that’s going to sell. More power to her — she succeeded really well. But then I also do think she took so many of the hard, dark, terrible things from her.”That sugarcoating, translated onto film, often made Marmee feel somehow less real, less significant, less subversive.“If you look at the earlier Marmees, they’re just hardly even there,” said Rioux. “They’re so unimportant and so uninteresting, they don’t even deserve screen time.”Spring Byington sparkled in Broadway comedies until she played Marmee in George Cukor’s 1933 version with Katharine Hepburn, leaving her pigeonholed as a fluttery maternal type.Mary Astor, who starred with June Allyson in Mervyn LeRoy’s 1949 adaptation, thought Marmee would be the end of her, her bitterness growing by the day. “I would sit quietly and wonder, ‘What am I doing here?’” she wrote in her 1959 autobiography, “My Story.”Maybe it takes a woman to know how to depict one. In 1994, the director Gillian Armstrong conjured up what Blackwood called a girl-power Marmee with Susan Sarandon, still soaring after “Thelma & Louise.” “She gets a lot of great lines like railing against corsets, which the real Marmee also did,” Blackwood said. “She’s really bustling around.”Sarandon, outfitted with a homeopathic kit and grungy period dresses, played Marmee as “what it would be like to explain to your girls how to be strong in a real feminine way” rather than “imitating the worst characteristics of men,” Sarandon said.“I think the tricky part is not making her sappy,” she added. “It’s trying to find a way within the language of that period to make her strong. But it comes from a mother’s love, not from being a proselytizing, politicized woman. She’s liberated in the sense that she has a very strong core idea of morals, of integrity, of kindness.”Still, it wasn’t until Vanessa Caswill’s 2017 BBC mini-series starring Emily Watson that a screen Marmee first uttered that line about anger. She even snaps at her daughters.“One of my friends turned to me and said, ‘Who among us hasn’t done that at one time or another?’” Rioux recalled. “I just thought, yeah, perfect.”Dern’s only trepidation about taking on Marmee was the realization that making her wisdom and language accessible would be difficult. “How do you hold the energy of someone who is rather iconic for an angelic nature but allow her to be a modern mother?” Dern asked. “And before I even expressed that to Greta, she said, ‘We want to make her modern and messy and complicated and available and powerful as opposed to just sitting quoting poetry and beautiful lines.’”“Just like Greta wanted to give Louisa the ending she may have always wanted to have,” Dern said, “we wanted to give her her real mother in all these complications, the marriage in all its complications, the heartbreak in all its complications.”But even that hasn’t been enough for some Marmee supporters. “I wasn’t satisfied by Marmee in the new film,” Blackwood said, “but I don’t even know what else could have satisfied me.”Maybe she’ll get a chance to find out: “Marmee & Louisa,” LaPlante’s dual biography, has been optioned and developed into a six-hour limited series by Engage Entertainment, and will soon be pitched to studios and networks.