Late Night Taken Aback as Trump Says He Likes to Obey the Law
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.Earlier this week, President Trump threatened to order attacks on Iranian cultural sites. After critics (and his defense secretary) said that would be a war crime, Trump took it back on Tuesday.“You know what, if that’s what the law is, I like to obey the law,” the president told reporters in the Oval Office.“No, you have to obey the law. Trump makes the law sound like it’s an optional topping at Chipotle. [Expletive], it’s the Geneva Convention, not pico de gallo.” — TREVOR NOAH“[As Trump] I like to obey the law, just ask Paul Manafort or Michael Cohen. If they ever get out of federal prison, they will vouch for me.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“How does this administration never seem to be on the same page? Trump says they’ll bomb cultural sites, his administration says he won’t. Trump says he will, they say he won’t, now he says he won’t. It’s like they have a group chat but Trump never gets the message because he’s on Android.” — TREVOR NOAH“Iran’s foreign minister today criticized President Trump’s strike on a military leader and said Trump is showing he is ‘prepared to commit war crimes.’ Well, that’s not really fair — he doesn’t prepare for anything.” — SETH MEYERS“The U.S. military accidentally sent a draft letter ordering U.S. troops to leave Iraq and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff called it a ‘kerfuffle.’ Then Trump was like, ‘I believe the word is covfefe.’” — JIMMY FALLON“Yeah, that’s right: The Pentagon released an announcement saying they were pulling out the troops and then they were like, ‘Backsies! I didn’t take my hand off the piece, I didn’t take my hand off the piece. That’s not the move!’” — TREVOR NOAH“You can’t send someone a letter of that magnitude and then say it doesn’t mean anything. That’s like saying, ‘Honey, that breakup email was from my drafts folder. Now, as I was saying, with this ring, I thee wed.’” — STEPHEN COLBERT“These people control nuclear weapons and they can’t even handle Microsoft Outlook.” — TREVOR NOAH“Jimmy Kimmel Live” sent Jake Byrd to a conference for “flat earthers” in Dallas.Larry David will visit “The Late Show” to talk about the long-awaited return of “Curb Your Enthusiasm.”