What’s on TV Saturday: John Prine and ‘One World’
By Sara AridiAUSTIN CITY LIMITS 11 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). This live music show is resurfacing an episode from 2018 to honor the Grammy-winning folk singer-songwriter John Prine, who died of complications from the coronavirus on April 7 at the age of 73. Prine was revered by Bob Dylan, and in 2019, was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. This performance, his eighth and final for “Austin City Limits,” came 40 years after he made his debut on the show in 1978. It features a few classics, such as “Illegal Smile,” off Prine’s debut record; “Lake Marie,” from 1995’s “Lost Dogs and Mixed Blessings,” and seven tracks from his final album, “The Tree of Forgiveness,” including “When I Get to Heaven.” It’s a joyful farewell, in which Prine makes peace with mortality and sings: “When I get to heaven, I’m gonna shake God’s hand/Thank him for more blessings than one man can stand/Then I’m gonna get a guitar and start a rock-n-roll band.”ONE WORLD: TOGETHER AT HOME 8 p.m. on various networks. Alanis Morissette, Billie Eilish, Chris Martin and more than a dozen other stars will celebrate and support front-line medical workers in the battle against the pandemic in this two-hour special. Presented by the advocacy group Global Citizen, the telecast will feature musical and comedic performances, as well as stories from doctors, nurses and grocery workers, and will benefit charities working to help those most affected by the outbreak. Jimmy Fallon, Jimmy Kimmel and Stephen Colbert will host. “One World” also includes an event with athletes, artists and social media influencers that will stream online from 2 p.m. to 8 p.m. A full list of networks and digital platforms is available at globalcitizen.org.TOO HOT TO HANDLE Stream on Netflix. We’ve all heard of this format: A group of attractive, fit single people are isolated together in a luxurious location, and it’s only a matter of time before drama — and lots of bad behavior — erupts. This new dating series wants to turn that model on its head. After 10 single contestants from around the globe arrive on an island expecting a wild summer, a digital personal assistant lays down the rules: “No kissing or sex of any kind.” Each time that rule is broken, money will be deducted from the $100,000 grand prize. Some contestants try to commit to the challenge and forge emotional rather than physical connections, while others just can’t help themselves.