What’s on TV Monday: ‘The Voice’ and ‘Gentefied’
By Mariel WamsleyTHE VOICE 8 p.m. on NBC. This singing competition is back for its 18th season, with Nick Jonas replacing Gwen Stefani as a coach. Episode 1 kicks off the competition’s blind auditions. Here, singers vying for the chance to be on the show — and mentored by Jonas, John Legend, Kelly Clarkson or Blake Shelton — will audition only with their voices. Later stages of the competition include singing battles and rehearsed performances, with the guest artists Dua Lipa, Ella Mai and Bebe Rexha, as well as Kevin and Joe Jonas.BLACK IN SPACE: BREAKING THE COLOR BARRIER 8 p.m. and 11 p.m. on Smithsonian. On Aug. 30, 1983, the astronaut Guion Bluford embarked as a crew member of the Space Shuttle Challenger, making him the first African-American in space. This documentary features him alongside Edward Dwight, an Air Force pilot edged out of a position with NASA, and Frederick Gregory, the first African-American to command a NASA mission, to examine the complications of sending a black man into space during the Cold War. Also included are Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez, the first Cuban astronaut sent into space by the Soviet Union, and Ronald McNair, an African-American pilot who died in the Challenger disaster in 1986.GENTEFIED Stream on Netflix. At the center of this show tackling gentrification is Casimiro (Joaquín Cosío), a struggling Mexican restaurant owner in the Boyle Heights neighborhood of Los Angeles. He’s aided by his grandchildren, who aim to strike a balance between tradition and modernity: Chris (Carlos Santos), an aspiring chef; Ana (Karrie Martin), an ambitious artist; and Erik (J.J. Soria), who helps Casimiro run the restaurant. In his review for The New York Times, James Poniewozik wrote that the series sometimes “wants to be a sharp-elbowed satire.” But “sometimes — more effectively,” he adds, “it’s a working-class family dramedy, conscious of the cascading effects of small financial setbacks and the code-switching involved in moving across cultures.”