What’s on TV Friday: ‘The Eddy’ and the Los Angeles Philharmonic
By Gabe CohnTHE EDDY Stream on Netflix. On the night we meet him, after the drinks have stopped flowing and the band has gone home, the jazz pianist at the center of this multilingual mini-series, Elliot Udo (André Holland), settles at a piano onstage at the Paris club he co-owns. He presses his fingers to the keys. At the bottom of the screen, a bracketed caption flashes. “Sad chord,” it reads. “Plaintive melody.” In other words: All is not well. The club is struggling. Its patrons are asking why Elliot doesn’t perform anymore. Elliot’s business partner, Farid (Tahar Rahim), is apparently involved in illicit activity. And soon, Elliot’s teenage daughter, Julie (Amandla Stenberg), will arrive from the United States to live with him. So begins the story of “The Eddy,” a jazz-forward mini-series written by Jack Thorne and directed by filmmakers who, perhaps unsurprisingly, include Damien Chazelle (“La La Land,” “Whiplash”). The story is infused with original music by the songwriter Glen Ballard.THE GOLDFINCH (2019) Stream on Amazon Prime. Social distancing may afford some of those who haven’t ever had time to read “The Goldfinch,” Donna Tartt’s lengthy, Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, a chance to finally do so. And it may give those who’ve read the book but skipped this film adaptation because it got weak reviews a reason to reconsider. The plot revolves around Theo, a boy who survives a terrorist bombing at the Metropolitan Museum of Art that kills his mother. The story follows Theo in the aftermath of the incident and years later, as he grapples with trauma, love and theft. The movie version, directed by John Crowley (“Brooklyn”), casts Ansel Elgort and Oakes Fegley as an older and younger Theo. In his review for The New York Times, A.O. Scott called it an “earnest and utterly flummoxing adaptation.”GREAT PERFORMANCES: LA PHIL 100 9:30 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Last year, three generations of Los Angeles Philharmonic music directors shared one stage for a concert to celebrate the orchestra’s centennial. Zubin Mehta conducted pieces by Wagner and Ravel. Esa-Pekka Salonen led a symphony by the Polish composer Witold Lutosławski. Gustavo Dudamel conducted Stravinsky’s “The Firebird.” And all three joined together to conduct “From Space I Saw Earth,” a piece by Daniel Bjarnason that was commissioned by the Philharmonic. With the orchestra now on hiatus in response to the coronavirus, this video version of the concert serves as both a celebration of the orchestra’s history and a reminder of what we’re missing.