Late Night Wants Trump to Cover Up His Face
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.On Friday, President Trump said the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention urged Americans to wear masks outside of their homes, simultaneously suggesting he would not be doing so himself.“Trump is all about appearance — he’s not going to be wearing a mask. He doesn’t care about safety. In fact, the only way they can get him to wear a mask is if his aides trick him. They just gotta trick him like he’s a child: ‘No, Mr. President, it’s not a mask — it’s a border wall for your face.’” — TREVOR NOAH“Meanwhile, while he was saying this, the first lady was tweeting: ‘I ask that everyone take social distancing and wearing a mask/face covering seriously. #COVID19 is a virus that can spread to anyone.’ Except for your husband, I guess.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“Here’s the thing: even if Trump wanted to wear a mask, you know she’d be running around the White House hiding them in places he’d never find them, like inside books, or under piles of vegetables.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“But what is the point of telling people to do something you aren’t doing yourself? Personally, I would love to see the president wearing a mask. Maybe then we could redub his voice to make him sound like an actual president.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“We were supposed to be covering our faces this whole time? Oh my god, Billy Porter tried to warn us.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Well, of course Trump is the guy saying he doesn’t want to wear protection.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Now Louisiana’s governor has ordered a statewide shutdown, banning gatherings of 10 or more people, but one pastor at a church near Baton Rouge held services yesterday, attracting hundreds of worshipers, many arriving in 26 buses sent to pick them up. That is just irresponsible. Remember Jesus’s words: ‘I was naked and you clothed me. I was sick and you put me on a crowded bus? Are you crazy? I’m contagious!’” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Now, when they got off their plague buses, the pastor told the congregation they had ‘Nothing to fear but fear itself.’ Sorry, pastor, these days fear is like third on the list, right after coronavirus and running out of toilet paper.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“OK, people, just because Jesus is on your side doesn’t mean you can’t get sick. Don’t forget: Jesus was on Jesus’s side and he died, O.K.? Yeah, he came back, but that was like a one-time thing. I think it’s like Mario Brothers lives — maybe he’s got two left.” — TREVOR NOAH“And you know it is funny how these same people say Jesus will protect them from coronavirus, are the same people stocking up on guns. I don’t get it. Won’t the blood of Jesus protect you from an intruder? [imitating gun owner] ‘Nah, I’m going with buckshot with this one. He needs Jesus more than me.” — TREVOR NOAHAn animated version of Malcolm Gladwell made an appearance on Monday night’s “Desus & Mero” where he made the case for nice New Yorkers.Senator Kamala Harris will virtually pop by “Late Night with Seth Meyers” on Tuesday night.