Mostly White, Male Hosts Slam Mostly White, Male Oscar Nominees
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.The Academy Award nominations have been announced, and the nominees in the acting categories are overwhelmingly white. In the best director category, all five nominees are men. On Monday, the late-night hosts, many of them also male and white, took aim at the fact that the Oscars continue to be so male and so white.“It was a big day for ‘1917’ — the year, not the movie. Though the movie, too, but 19 of the 20 acting nominees are white people. No women were nominated for best director. That’s fewer minorities than in Donald Trump’s cabinet, so… .” — JIMMY KIMMEL“Democrats in Hollywood are always talking about how important diversity is, but they’re the ones who always seem to end up celebrating a bunch of white people.” — TREVOR NOAH“The nominees are so white, this year’s Oscars are being held at Pottery Barn.” — JIMMY FALLON“Those aren’t just all male directors — those are all very male movies. Like if you take out ‘Parasite,’ women probably have 10 minutes of dialogue in all the other films combined. Like, there’s no reason women shouldn’t have bigger roles in these movies, except for ‘1917’ because women weren’t invented till the ’30s. That’s a fact.” — TREVOR NOAH“I mean, like, where’s ‘Little Women’? Personally, I love the movie. Also, the Oscar voters love the movie. It’s weird. it’s really strange because it was nominated for six awards including best picture, best screenplay, two acting nominations, but then somehow Greta Gerwig wasn’t nominated for director. How the hell does that happen? Was it just two people, like, ‘What an amazing movie!’ ‘Yeah, did you know it directed itself?’” — TREVOR NOAHTONIGHT: Congrats to “Little Women” for directing itself! pic.twitter.com/scD3kL9OCY“As usual, there’s a lot of controversy about the nominations. First of all, none of the nominations for best director are women. Yeah, you know there is a problem when female directors got the same number of nominations as ‘Cats.’” — JIMMY FALLON“Actually, Universal, the studio that made ‘Cats,’ pulled the movie from Oscar contention, which is always funny. They probably didn’t need to do that. That’s like Mike Pence pulling out of contention for a ‘Soul Train’ award — it’s unnecessary.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“I’m glad that at least one black woman was nominated for best actress. Congratulations, Cynthia Erivo, that’s exciting. Although it was kind of predictable it was for playing a slave. Yeah. I’m not saying she didn’t deserve it, but just imagine if every white actor who was nominated got it for playing a supervisor at Whole Foods, huh? White people, you’re more than just that!” — TREVOR NOAH“And maybe the most surprising best picture nominee was ‘Ford v Ferrari.’ This is a movie that was apparently so good even Matt Damon couldn’t ruin it.” — JIMMY KIMMEL“This surprised a lot of people, though: ‘Frozen 2’ didn’t get nominated for best animated feature. The producer was like, ‘If one more person texts me “Let it go,” I am going to snap.’” — JIMMY FALLON“That’s right — Cory Booker has announced that he is officially quitting the Democratic presidential race. And, look, you can quit however you want, but I do think it’s weird that his quitting video doesn’t look like he’s quitting. He’s out there with crowds, shaking hands — and everyone does this. My opinion is if you’re going to drop out of the race, your video should look like you dropped out of the race. It should just be you sitting alone on a park bench, or cleaning out your desk. I want it to look depressing!” — TREVOR NOAH[Imitating Booker] “We need to stand together, work together, rise together, sit back down together, and quit alone!” — STEPHEN COLBERT“But, yeah, whatever happens in November, America will not be electing a black president. And you know, Obama must be secretly happy about this. Yeah, he’s probably in Martha's Vineyard like, ‘Ah, that’s right. Ah, first and last, [expletive]! I’m the blackest of all time!’” — TREVOR NOAHStephen Colbert scored an exclusive fake interview with President Trump on Iran.Michael Bloomberg, the big-spending Democratic candidate for president, will sit down with Colbert on Tuesday.