Eurovision Song Contest Is Canceled Over Coronavirus Concerns
By Alex MarshallLONDON — The Eurovision Song Contest — Europe’s longest-running, most popular and perhaps its campiest talent competition — has been canceled because of the coronavirus pandemic.“Over the past few weeks we have explored many alternative options to allow the Eurovision Song Contest to go ahead,” the European Broadcasting Union, which organizes the event, said in a statement on Twitter on Wednesday. But no solution worked, it added: “It is impossible to continue with the live event as planned.”The final of this year’s contest, which would have involved acts from 41 countries, was scheduled to be held in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, on May 16. The country, like much of Europe, is on lockdown in an effort to curtail the virus.This year will be the first time the competition — known for its over-the-top acts — has not taken place since it started in 1956, said Chris West, the author of a book on the history of Eurovision.Some countries have chosen not to take part in the competition before, West said in a telephone interview. Turkey has boycotted Eurovision since 2013, when it expressed dissatisfaction with the voting rules. In 2018, the head of Turkey’s public broadcaster said the boycott was also partly because some past winners, including the drag queen Conchita Wurst, had gone against Turkey’s social values.Eurovision is mainly a television spectacle, with people around Europe — and to a lesser extent in Australia and the United States — gathering for viewing parties and casting telephone votes to choose the winner. Juries representing each country also contribute.Last year’s contest, won by the Dutch singer Duncan Laurence, was watched live by over 180 million people. Thousands of fans also travel from around the world to watch the finals, which are held in the country that last won the title.“I do think it’s the responsible decision,” West said about the cancellation of this year’s event.The atmosphere would have been altered by the coronavirus crisis anyway, he said. “It would be rather different — a bit like football matches played to empty stadiums — it wouldn’t be the same thing.”West said that the European Broadcasting Union could have tried showing recordings of the acts and have the public phone in votes. But even that might be untenable, he added, as it would still require the host and judges to gather in television studios.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The statement from Eurovision’s organizers said discussions would be held with the Rotterdam and Dutch authorities about the 2021 contest.Almost all of Europe’s major cultural venues are now shuttered in response to the coronavirus pandemic, and many major events have been canceled or postponed. Eurovision’s announcement came just hours after the Glastonbury music festival was canceled for the year.A few events are still holding out, including the Cannes Film Festival, which is scheduled to run from May 12-23.On Saturday, the French newsmagazine Le Point published an article in which an anonymous member of the festival’s board was quoted saying that this year’s film festival would not take place. But the organizers have denied that any decision has been made.