James Corden Suggests a Band for Coachella: The Cure
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.Concern over the coronavirus spreading has forced conferences, schools and other large gatherings into canceling or postponing for the foreseeable future.“Also today, it was announced that, due to coronavirus, the music festival Coachella has now been postponed until October. In fact, headliner Rage Against the Machine has already changed their name to Rage to Get the Vaccine. And that’s not the only musical act that plans to be in Coachella in October. You can also count on Miley Virus, Justin Fever, the Flu Fighters, Pandemic! at the Disco — we got like a hundred of these. The only band yet to confirm is the Cure.” — JAMES CORDEN“Today, ‘Wheel of Fortune’ filmed without an audience as a protective measure against the coronavirus. Things are so bad over there, Vanna is now turning all the letters with her elbow.” — JIMMY FALLON“Meanwhile, because of the virus, the mayor of Boston announced their annual St. Patrick’s Day Parade has been canceled. Yeah, the mayor asked if instead of drinking, puking and blacking out in the streets, people could make the mature choice and do it at home.” — JIMMY FALLON“Harvard just announced they’re sending all their students home until further notice, and they’ll take classes online. Now if you meet someone who says they went to Harvard, you can be like, ‘Oh, that online college?’” — JIMMY FALLON“Meanwhile, students at U.S.C. are also being told to stay home, because their rich, famous parents are still under investigation for bribery.” — JAMES CORDEN“Tonight, six states held their primaries, including one of the areas hardest hit by the virus, Washington State. Luckily, all of their voting is done by mail. But there is some worry that the mail-in votes themselves could be a source of contagion, so the state just introduced this actual new slogan about their ballot envelopes: ‘Whether healthy or sick, please don’t lick.’ Yeah. It’s better than the last election when they were battling an S.T.D. outbreak with the slogan, ‘Please don’t slurp if you’ve got herp.’” — STEPHEN COLBERT“That’s right, the mini Tuesday primary was today, where six states held their primaries. So after tonight, we might finally know once and for all whether Tulsi Gabbard can take a hint.” — SETH MEYERS“Does Tulsi Gabbard know she’s still in the race? I feel like it’s one of those things where you forget to cancel your health club membership.” — JIMMY KIMMELEveryone is suddenly a coronavirus expert, as this “Jimmy Kimmel Live” segment found on the streets of Hollywood.Senator Bernie Sanders will visit Jimmy Fallon on Wednesday.