‘The Hunt’ Showdown: 7 Months of Training; 7 Minutes of Combat
By Bruce FrettsThis article contains spoilers for “The Hunt.”It’s a showdown of pop-culture gladiators: Million Dollar Baby vs. Liberty Belle.Hilary Swank, who won an Oscar for playing a boxer in “Million Dollar Baby,” and Betty Gilpin, an Emmy nominee for her turn as the wrestler Liberty Belle, or Debbie Eagan, in “GLOW,” square off in an over-the-top fight sequence at the climax of the new satirical action picture “The Hunt.”The actors’ backgrounds in on-screen combat were a boon to Hank Amos, who along with Heidi Moneymaker served as the film’s stunt coordinator. “Both of them were already so far ahead of the game,” Amos said in a recent phone interview. “Trust me, those ladies can throw down.”The clash takes place in the high-end kitchen of a mansion owned by Athena (Swank), a wealthy liberal who organizes a hunting party of elitists to track down and kill a dozen so-called “deplorables,” including Crystal (Gilpin).The finale opens with six minutes of verbal sparring, followed by a seven-minute battle that utilizes such improvised weapons as hanging light fixtures and the chopping blade of a food processor. “I’ve filmed so many scenes in kitchens, but never one quite like this,” Gilpin said in a recent phone interview. “To have some meat-and-potatoes scene work with two-time Oscar winner Hilary Swank and then beat the crap out of each other was incredible.”Gilpin trained for seven months in preparation for the fight. “I did all the tire lifting and sled pushing that my weird little Irish body could do,” Gilpin said. “I was eating bison meat, drinking protein shakes and taking insanely good care of myself.”The director, Craig Zobel (“Compliance”), worked with the stunt coordinators for eight weeks to choreograph the brawl. The script, by Nick Cuse and Damon Lindelof, said “something like, ‘And what follows is an epic fight scene,’” Zobel recalled in a recent phone interview. “So we had to figure out how to make it interesting.”The set, on a soundstage in New Orleans, “was built specifically for us to destroy,” Amos said. Padding was added to certain walls that the actors would smash into. The scene was shot in chronological order, “which was great because we did so much damage to the environment that it wasn’t like we could pre-damage an area, go and shoot in there, then clean it all up and backtrack,” Amos said.The stunt doubles Sarah Irwin (for Swank) and Caitlin Dechelle (for Gilpin) “were only put in for stuff that would require them to take some hard hits or crash through something,” Amos said. “We used Betty and Hilary for a major portion of the fight.”Certain elements came from Zobel. “When I was location scouting for the film, we went to a place with a pass-through fireplace,” he said. “I thought, ‘Oh, that could be useful for a fight scene.’” Hence, Gilpin throws Swank through such a furnace.When Gilpin swings from a rope sculpture, the move used the macramé work of Zobel’s friend, the Brooklyn artist Maeve Pacheco. “In my mind, these big sculptural pieces felt like they would be in Athena’s house,” Zobel said.Both Zobel and Amos were particularly amused when Swank breaks open a shotgun to reload it, then closes the weapon on Gilpin’s arm. “That’s my favorite cringe moment in the fight,” Amos said. “Because nobody wants to get pinched. Hit in the face, sure. But pinched? No way.”The sequence was shot over five 12-hours days last year at the very end of production last year, a rare instance of a finale filmed late in the schedule. “It was invaluable because we knew what the farcical tone of the movie was by then and how far we could go,” Zobel said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.During those grueling days, “the hardest part was to keep up the intensity,” Amos said. “For the first couple of hours, everybody’s into it, but a big part of my job is playing cheerleader and making sure everybody keeps their enthusiasm up. Because we’ve got people crashing through walls and getting stuff broken over their heads, and we all need to be respectful of that.”It’s the only scene Gilpin and Swank share in the film. “I’m a superfan of her work, so I tried to remain as professional as I could without sobbing in her face when I met her,” Gilpin said. “We knew we were going to have our bodies and safety in each other’s hands, so there was no time for stumbling small talk.”But the actors still had fun. “We were laughing the whole time,” Gilpin said. “We would run back to the monitor and watch the playback to see if the punches were landing and what we needed to work on.”Despite the scene’s almost-cartoonish quality, the intention was to “make it look really scary and cool,” Gilpin said. “We didn’t want to be two tiny women poking forks at each other. We wanted it to be just as wild and terrifying as if two men were fighting.”