What’s on TV Sunday: ‘Dispatches from Elsewhere’ and ‘Doctor Who’
By Sara AridiDISPATCHES FROM ELSEWHERE 10 p.m. on AMC. Fans of elaborate scavenger hunts would get a kick of out this new anthology series. The idea came to Jason Segel, the show’s creator and star, after he discovered an art project and immersive game that drew more than 7,000 people in San Francisco and Oakland from 2008 to 2011. He adapted it for the screen and plays one of four characters (along with Sally Field, André Benjamin and Eve Lindley) who are brought together by what is, at the outset, to some a practical joke and to others a global conspiracy. There’s an element of growth here: Along the way, the journey helps participants overcome inner battles. In a recent interview with The New York Times, Segel said the show celebrates regular people. “A lot of stories are about someone finding out that they’re extraordinary,” he said. “And this whole thing, it’s this idea that we can all be ordinary together and that it’s beautiful.”AXIOS 6 p.m. on HBO. This limited documentary series — a treat for news junkies — returns for a third run. Journalists from the news outlet Axios interview high-profile subjects in the fields of business, politics and technology. Among those who have sat in the hot seat are President Trump, Senator Kamala Harris and Bill Gates.DOCTOR WHO 8 p.m. on BBC America. In last week’s episode, the Cyber war raged on as the revelation of a portal presented another game-changing mystery. In this episode, the second part of this science fiction series’ season finale, Graham (Bradley Walsh), Ryan (Tosin Cole) and Yaz (Mandip Gill) cling to survival, while the Doctor (Jodie Whittaker) seeks much-needed answers. The show has a long history, and it isn’t over yet: Whittaker and the showrunner Chris Chibnall will return for another season.BAR RESCUE 10 p.m. on Paramount. Who doesn’t love a good makeover story? There’s plenty in this reality show, back for a seventh season, in which the host and night life expert Jon Taffer helps bar owners breathe new life into their failing businesses.