Who Needs Special Effects When You Have Arts and Crafts?
By Nicole SperlingEliza Zeitlin was adamant: the puppet had to be life-size.In “Wendy,” a rustic adaptation of “Peter Pan” that opens Friday in theaters, a glowing underwater sea creature serves as a possible solution to growing up. Zeitlin, the production designer and screenwriter who co-wrote “Wendy” with her older brother, the director Benh Zeitlin, was certain that the mysterious being needed to be giant and as real-looking as possible.“A lot of people were not excited about that,” Eliza Zeitlin admitted in January after the siblings’s film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival. “Part of the magic of cinema is trickery, but I think you know when you’re looking at something that’s not real. I wanted her to be full size for the audience and also for the kids. I wanted the kids to be able to feel that this character is real.”So while the Zeitlins, who had previously collaborated on “Beasts of the Southern Wild,” took turns writing the script and scouting locations in Antigua and Montserrat, Eliza was busy creating a 30-foot long monster with a 12-foot gullet that the children characters could interact with. Made of plastic and silicone, “Mother,” as she is called in the film, was covered in real sponges — or rather remnants of the real thing — that the designer had trucked in. “We found a sponge farm in Florida that was willing to give us truckloads of all their sponge scrap,” she said.The sponges, which she painted to look like barnacles, created a soft enough surface that the children — most of whom were acting for the first time — could hug her without getting hurt.In the end, the Zeitlins turned to HamerFX to help with the fabrication of the malleable prop and to ensure it would work in the water.Mother did pose other challenges for crew members. To transport the giant beast, they had to cut it into five pieces (each carried by Eliza Zeitlin, who did a lot of the testing by herself) and reassemble it in the water.They also had to find underwater puppeteers, a job that doesn’t actually exist. The two settled on turning the engineers and fabricators of the creature into divers — and puppeteers. “Initially, we were trying to research who had done large-scale underwater puppets before and we were digging in, digging in,” said Benh Zeitlin. “And we were like, ‘Wow, this is amazing. No one has ever done this before. Great.’”The Zeitlins also needed to light the creature underwater, a challenge they solved by making casings for film projectors that would display slow-motion fireworks to gave the creature’s gullet both light and movement. (Visual effects were necessary on the back end to bring the whole film together, but that also proved challenging since VFX supervisors need a still point to do their work and the guiding principle of Mother was that she be in constant motion.)The biggest heartbreak for the siblings, who grew up in Sunnyside, Queens, with folklorist parents who encouraged their creative expression, came on an Antigua beach while filming the final scene. They had initially envisioned Mother on the shore surrounded by singing children, but changing surf conditions turned a low tide into formidable force that threatened to overwhelm the very location itself.“The puppet is sitting there on the shore, and one wave comes through and fills the entire face with sand,” Eliza recalled.“We just saw her getting torn apart,” Benh said.“That was definitely the darkest hour for me,” Eliza added.But they recovered quickly and rewrote the scene, making it puppetless.