Trump Tweets ‘All Is Well,’ but Late Night Has Its Doubts
By Trish BendixWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.On Tuesday, President Trump tweeted “All is well!” after Iran fired missiles at two Iraqi bases housing American troops. (No one was killed, it appears.)“‘All is well.’ That’s not how you address the nation on matters of war. That’s how a sophomore addresses his parents on a postcard from a trip abroad.” — SETH MEYERS“Which was hilarious because the tweet was composed like Trump was writing a letter from the front lines of the Civil War. [As Trump] ‘My dearest Twitter, all is well. Missiles launched from Iran. So far so good. I hope to see you soon. Please kiss Ivanka for me and not Eric. Sincerely, Donald hashtag MAGA, hashtag read the transcript.’” — TREVOR NOAH“It’s O.K., folks. It’s O.K. We’ve achieved Defcon Fine.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“It’s like that joke about the guy who jumped off the skyscraper — you know that joke? He’s passing the 18th floor, someone yells out the window, ‘How’s it going?’ and he yells back, ‘So far so good!’” — JIMMY KIMMELThen on Wednesday, Trump gave a televised statement from the Grand Foyer of the White House. Late-night hosts found his dramatic entry ripe for commentary, along with his flubbing of words like “tolerated” and “accomplishments.”“He enters the room — it’s like the aliens in ‘Close Encounters’ coming out of the ship. What does he have in there, a tanning bed?” — JIMMY KIMMEL"Trump’s mouth was missing more targets than those Iranian missiles.” — TREVOR NOAH“You got to hand it to him — he’s the only person who makes typos out loud.” — JIMMY FALLON“Rest easy, America. That is the man deciding who ligs and who dibes.” — STEPHEN COLBERT“Today, Prince Harry and Meghan Markle announced that they’ll no longer be senior members of the royal family and they might move to Canada. I give them a lot of credit — tons of celebrities always threaten to move to Canada; they’re actually doing it.” — JIMMY FALLON“Or as it was reported in British tabloids, ‘Meghan kidnapped Harry!’” — SETH MEYERS“There are senior levels of royal? I thought it just went, like, king, queen, prince, princess, jack of spades, boy wizard, Dukes of Hazzard and then cartoon mouse that sews Cinderella’s dress.” — STEPHEN COLBERTOn “The Tonight Show,” Quentin Tarantino explained how “Reservoir Dogs” was inspired by his appearance as an Elvis impersonator on “The Golden Girls.”Will Smith and Patti Smith (no relation) will both be on “The Tonight Show” Thursday.