Watch This: The ‘Brockmire’ Finale
This week, our TV critic recommends the final episode of the show with TV’s lewdest banter, as well as another series about an emotionally damaged sports guy.By Margaret LyonsEvery Monday, Wednesday and Friday, our TV critic Margaret Lyons offers hyper-specific viewing recommendations in our Watching newsletter. Read her latest picks below, and sign up for the Watching newsletter here.‘Brockmire’When to watch: Wednesday at 10 p.m., on IFC.My beloved filthy baseball comedy ends this week, somehow capping a truly strange fourth season with a sentimental, satisfying finale. The show is about a hard-living baseball announcer (Hank Azaria) and in its fourth season leapt ahead in time to a dystopian America ravaged by … well, just about everything. “The American myth needs to be restored — soon,” coos the spokesperson for an invasive technology company. Perhaps baseball is up to the task?“Brockmire” is a dialogue show more than it’s anything else — the stories, the settings, the characters all matter less than the patter, which is fine because the patter is so good. (It’s also blisteringly lewd.) Even with subplots I didn’t necessarily love, I stayed invested in “Brockmire” for the jokes, and I’m glad I did.‘Go On’When to watch: Now, on the NBC website (free).This one-season comedy from 2012 takes a little while to center itself, so just start with Episode 5. (You can loop back should the spirit so move you, but don’t feel a need.) Matthew Perry stars as a mildly jerkish sportscaster and recent widower who joins a quirky grief support group. If you watch a lot of short-lived shows, you will recognize every person in this cast and be thrilled to see them all: John Cho, Laura Benanti, Julie White, Brett Gelman, Sarah Baker, Suzy Nakamura, Tyler James Williams (that’s his brother Tyrel Jackson Williams on “Brockmire”).“Go On” picks up substantially over its run, exorcising some of its glibness and swapping in more depth and charm, especially from its supporting characters. I have no idea why “Go On,” of all the canceled NBC shows, is newly available to stream — give us “Trial and Error,” please oh please — but if you like oddball ensembles and can’t wait till “Dead to Me” comes back on Friday, watch this.The series finale of the revival of “Star Wars: The Clone Wars” is now on Disney Plus.A phone-size revival of “Reno 911!” is now available on Quibi. (What’s Quibi?)The season finale of “My Brilliant Friend” airs Monday at 10 p.m. on HBO. The show has been renewed for a third season.Other season finales this week: “All Rise” (Monday at 9 p.m. on CBS); “The Conners,” “Bless This Mess,” “mixed-ish” and “black-ish” (Tuesday starting at 8 p.m., on ABC); “FBI: Most Wanted” (Tuesday at 10 p.m., on CBS); “Riverdale” (Wednesday at 8 p.m. on the CW) and “Tommy” (Thursday at 10 p.m. on CBS).