What’s on TV Monday: ‘The Bachelor’ and ‘The Family Farm’ 
By Peter LibbeyTHE BACHELOR 8 p.m. on ABC. After 23 seasons, this show is more than a dating competition. The search for love is still ostensibly at its core but, by this point, the spectacle surrounding it is at least as much of a draw as anything else. In the 24th season’s premiere episode, Peter Weber, an airline pilot, begins his tenure as the show’s focal point by meeting the 30 women competing for his affection. By the end of the marathon night only 22 will remain. Weber previously appeared as a contestant on the last season of “The Bachelorette,” in which he was Hannah Brown’s third choice. According to a preview of the episode, Brown, whose romance with her first choice Jed Wyatt didn’t work out, will make an appearance.THE FAMILY FARM Stream on Acorn TV. This four-part reality series follows three families that relocate to northern Wales for the summer to try their hand at farming. None of them have any experience with agriculture but all feel that something can be learned from working the land at Gareth Wyn Jones’s family farm in the mountainous Snowdonia region. Challenges set by the hosts Wyn Jones and Kate Humble help push the families to adapt to their new lifestyle.EYES WIDE SHUT (1999) Stream on Hulu. Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. Despite being analyzed over and over again since its release, Stanley Kubrick’s final film remains stubbornly enigmatic. Tom Cruise plays Bill Harford, a doctor whose patients include some of New York City’s most elite citizens. After finding out that his wife Alice (Nicole Kidman) once considered having an affair with a naval officer she encountered on vacation, Bill has a series of strange experiences. The most notable of these occurs at a clandestine gathering he sneaks into at a suburban mansion. Bill’s unauthorized presence is discovered and he’s ejected but not before witnessing the beginning of what appears to be a ritualized orgy held by a secret society. The film’s stilted acting, elliptical plot and surfeit of symbolism make its messages difficult to pin down. But like an intense dream, it’s hard to escape the feeling that something important is being conveyed through the confusion.