‘Sorry We Missed You’ Review: The Human Toll of That One-Click Buy
In this Ken Loach film, a British family that’s barely getting by faces the peril that is the gig economy.By Wesley MorrisWhen you purchase a ticket for an independently reviewed film through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.I’ll never forget the pleading that goes on in “Sorry We Missed You.” It’s desperate but futile. Life goes on, they say. So does the global marketplace. If you order a shower curtain or diapers or a new phone, you probably need it yesterday. Ken Loach’s brutally moving agitprop drama demands a thought be spared for the anonymous souls who drop this stuff off. That shower curtain might be the death of them.It’s an easy movie at first. Ricky Turner (Kris Hitchen) has done blue-collar labor all his life. Now he’s through with bosses breathing down his neck, so he takes a job as an owner-driver for a third-party delivery company out of Newcastle in northern England. (The title refers to those door tags you get when a package needs a signature and you’re not home.) Gig-economy freedom appeals to him. But anybody watching Ricky natter on about blissful independence, in these opening scenes, can already sense the bad news rising — maybe even before his new not-boss, a big bruiser named Maloney (Ross Brewster), tells him, “Like everything around here, it’s your choice.”First of all, Ricky has no van to transport the parcels. A new one costs about $18,000, and he doesn’t have that kind of money, not even for the $1,200 down payment. When he strong-arms his wife, Abby (Debbie Honeywood), into selling the family car that she also depends on for her own job taking care of the disabled, elderly and infirm, you feel the movie starting down a track that will, at some point, make you get angry, then consider terminating your Amazon Prime membership.Except this is a Loach movie, and along with being one of Earth’s most venerable and venerated directors, he’s almost without peer as a filmmaker formidably committed to exposing the sins of our wages. For six decades, his film and television work — “Kes,” “Riff-Raff,” Ladybird, Ladybird,” “My Name Is Joe,” “Looking for Eric,” “I, Daniel Blake” — has looked at regular working folks and, often, what that work costs them. He knows you’re unlikely to cancel anything. But he damn sure wants you to think long and hard about that next one-click buy.Paul Laverty has written many of Loach’s scripts, including this one. He’s attuned to seeding problems early so that they sprout distress later. Abby’s employment becomes as central to the drama as Ricky’s. With the car sold, she has to take the bus, and like her husband, she works for a subcontractor that has no evident concern for her humanity, let alone that of the clients whom she treats with maximal warmth and heroic empathy. She, too, works long, difficult hours and has to manage her family and her clients on the fly. Her title is care worker; the marvel of Honeywood’s performance is how to heart she’s taken the term.The Turners have two kids, a teen angel named Liza Jane (Katie Proctor) and an older, adolescent punk called Seb (Rhys Stone), whose rebellious street art compounds the household stress and jeopardizes Ricky’s ability to meet his relentless delivery quotas. Loach knows how to direct actors to appear true, to be capable of surprise. Stone, for instance, is acting his surname, but there’s something soft and knowing in this guy that’s always absorbingly present. And Hitchen sees to it that Ricky’s delusions, stubbornness and iffy decision-making never tip into stupidity. He’s peevish, slack-jawed, a little rascally. He loves his family and his football team (Man U, not Newcastle, as one appalled parcel recipient observes).The acting here smooths out the blocky, talky, implausibly ruminative aspects of Laverty’s writing. Like, when Ricky and Abby lay awake and discuss their troubles. There’s a tidiness to that scene that feels more screenplay than natural intimacy. Still, you believe this family. You believe in them. There are also all kinds of meaningful, seemingly disposable, smart details. The film contains, for instance, one of the movies’ more moral arguments for the up- and downsides of advanced communication: Abby’s life would shatter without her phone; Seb’s psyche shatters without his.For everything to go right with this family, not one thing can go remotely wrong. No one can afford to get sick, attend an unscheduled school meeting, miss a bus, be robbed. It’s all too precarious, which is to say it’s all too real. Watching the Turners, I thought about the scam the Kim family pulls in Bong Joon Ho’s “Parasite” and how that film ingeniously reconsiders class warfare as nightmare farce. Both movies become tragedies, but Bong’s feels like an allegory where Loach’s feels like activism. They’re both thinking large and minutely. But globalism’s faceless grind couldn’t be more local, more personal than it is in “Sorry We Missed You.” The movie’s as pungent as “Parasite” but with none of the comic frills, none of Bong’s cinematic fashion. It’s closer, actually, to that astounding documentary about the Macedonian beekeepers, “Honeyland.”There’s no way for Loach to have gone smaller. When the movie’s over, you have, indeed, witnessed a tragedy, just not the usual kind. Nobody dies. No one goes to prison (there is one police-station visit unlike any I’ve seen). But life: that’s the tragedy, what it takes to get by, what it takes be just a little bit happy — for one lousy meal. The stakes of the film are simultaneously huge and small. The Turners don’t need much. Some stability; a steady income, of course; more time would be a dream. Really, though, the most precious thing they have is each other. But there’s no time for that because then there’d be no money.Sorry We Missed You