What’s on TV Tuesday: ‘Schitt’s Creek’ and ‘What You Gonna Do’
By Sara AridiSCHITT’S CREEK 8 p.m. on Comedy Central, Logo and Pop TV. Last week, the first half of this Canadian sitcom’s series finale brought viewers to tears. (Spoiler alert!) The four members of the Rose family prepared to leave the motel behind. Moira (Catherine O’Hara) and Johnny (Eugene Levy) are off to Los Angeles; Alexis (Annie Murphy) is heading to New York and David (Daniel Levy) and Patrick (Noah Reid) are staying in the titular town to build a new life together. In the second half of the finale, which will also air on Comedy Central and Logo, rain threatens to ruin David’s wedding day, but the family is there to lift his spirits. In an interview with The New York Times, Daniel Levy, one of the show’s creators, said the series can do without grand gestures at its end. Fans “don’t need a huge fireworks display,” he said. “They just want to know that the characters are going to be OK.” A documentary special on the making of the final season follows at 8:30 p.m.THE LAST O.G. 10:30 p.m. on TBS. When we last saw Tray (Tracy Morgan), the former convict at the center of this comedy series, he was in disarray after his food truck went up in flames. Now he’s ready to move out of his mother’s house and get back on his feet. In this third season premiere, Tray searches for a place of his own in his newly gentrified Brooklyn neighborhood and seeks advice from an old-timer (Mike Tyson) on how to move on from his checkered past. Other guest stars making an appearance this season include J.B. Smoove, Marla Gibbs and Katt Williams.WHAT YOU GONNA DO WHEN THE WORLD’S ON FIRE? (2019) Rent or buy on Amazon, FandangoNOW, Google Play, iTunes and Vudu. This documentary weaves four stories together to paint a portrait of the troubles plaguing African-Americans in the South, mainly in New Orleans. There’s a teenager teaching his younger brother how to defend himself as shootings become a regular occurrence; a bar owner struggling to keep her business afloat; a group called the New Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, which protests police violence against young black men, and a chief with the Mardi Gras Indians who is working to keep the tribes’ cultural heritage alive. Ben Kenigsberg named the movie a Critic’s Pick in his review for The Times. “Although the people in the film may have been let down by institutions,” he wrote, “they draw strength from one another.”