Coronavirus, Testing Delays Push Europe-Russia Mars Mission to 2022
By Kenneth ChangA European-Russian mission to put a rover on Mars and look for signs of life there has been postponed, to 2022.Most parts of the mission including the rocket and the rover, named Rosalind Franklin, are ready. But not enough time remains before the launch opportunity in July to complete tests of the parachutes, fix issues with an electronics module and finish the spacecraft’s software.“We could launch, but that would mean we are not doing all the tests,” Jan Woerner, the director general of the European Space Agency, said during a news conference on Thursday morning where the decision was announced. “We cannot really cut corners.”The coronavirus pandemic played a role in the decision. Dimitry Rogozin, head of Russia’s space agency, said that “force majeure circumstances related to exacerbation of the epidemiological situation in Europe” would leave mission staff from both countries unable to travel.Dr. Woerner and Mr. Rogozin discussed the status of the mission by teleconference before deciding on the delay; because of the pandemic, Dr. Woerner canceled plans to meet in person with Mr. Rogozin in Moscow.“This is a very tough decision, but it’s, I’m sure, the right one,” Dr. Woerner said.The positions of Mars and Earth line up every 26 months, allowing a relatively quick trip. Missing that alignment means that the mission will stay on the ground until the next opportunity between August and October 2022.The ExoMars program has persisted through more than a decade of starts and stops and shifts in plans. Originally, it was a collaboration between the European Space Agency and NASA, with NASA providing the rockets and the landing system, similar to what was used to put NASA’s Curiosity rover on Martian ground in 2012.But in February 2012, the Obama administration pulled out of the plans, partly to pay for delays and cost overruns with the James Webb Space Telescope. The Europeans then turned to Russia. The first half of the ExoMars program, the Trace Gas Orbiter, launched in March 2016 on a Russian Proton rocket. It entered orbit around Mars seven months later and continues to operate.But the accompanying lander, Schiaparelli, crashed after a sensor error caused the spacecraft to jettison its parachute too early because it thought it was already on the ground instead of still two miles in the air.The ExoMars rover, which will use a different landing system, was originally scheduled to launch in 2018, but that launch window was missed because of delays in the completion of the spacecraft and the instruments.Some NASA Mars missions have also missed launch windows. Curiosity was to have launched in 2009 but was pushed back two years because of problems with electrical motors. Problems with a key instrument on Mars InSight delayed its launch to 2018 from 2016. Both eventually landed on Mars successfully.The thin atmosphere of Mars makes landing particularly tricky, requiring careful testing of parachutes and other systems used to reach the surface. There is not enough air to provide much drag on the spacecraft as it speeds to the ground, although what’s there still generates friction that heats the exterior of a spacecraft to thousands of degrees.Two earlier European landers — the Beagle 2 in 2003 and Schiaparelli in 2016 — failed. A number of Soviet landing attempts in the 1970s also failed. Only NASA has been able to successfully operate robotic spacecraft on the surface of Mars.Last year, the parachutes for the ExoMars mission — one that is 50 feet wide to deploy at supersonic speeds in the Martian atmosphere, and a second, 120-foot-wide one that would billow out at subsonic speeds — failed in tests.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.With NASA’s help, the problems with the ExoMars parachutes were diagnosed and additional tests are planned for this month.The spacecraft will be put in storage once it is completed later this year. No changes will be made to the spacecraft or the instruments, Dr. Woerner said.Other missions to Mars scheduled to launch this year appear to be on track: a NASA rover, Perseverance, a Chinese rover and an orbiter from the United Arab Emirates called Hope.