These Lab Animals Will Help Fight Coronavirus
By James GormanAmong the many lessons of the coronavirus pandemic is how close humans are to the rest of the animal kingdom. We get diseases from other animals, and then we use more animals to figure out how to stop the diseases. As research ramps up treatments and vaccines, animals are crucial to fighting the pandemic.There are different animals at each end of the pandemic, of course. The new disease almost certainly began with a bat virus, scientists agree. That virus probably passed through another animal, perhaps pangolins, on its way to humans.But the animals that scientists will depend on in the lab are mice, first of all, and then perhaps ferrets or hamsters or monkeys. Around the world, different laboratories are racing to breed stocks of mice genetically engineered for research and testing the susceptibility of other animals to infection with the virus that causes Covid-19.There are, of course, many objections to animal testing, particularly when it comes to primates, but researchers are deeply concerned about the hazards to humans of treatments or vaccines that have not been tried on other animals first.No single kind of animal will serve all test purposes and scientists have several criteria for what makes an animal useful in testing therapies and vaccines for effectiveness.First, it must be susceptible to infection, and not all animals are. Despite the quarantining of one dog in Hong Kong, with a “weak positive” test for coronavirus, various health agencies are not taking a single, ambiguous result as evidence for concern. Advisories state there is no evidence yet that pets are susceptible to the disease.And even when laboratory animals are susceptible to infection, that doesn’t mean they get sick. “Most of them, they don’t care at all that they’re infected,” said Dr. Stanley Perlman, a microbiologist at the University of Iowa who developed a mouse in 2003 that was susceptible to infection with the SARS virus. It is called the hACE2 mouse.If an animal doesn’t get sick from the infection, its use is limited, because testing treatment effectiveness requires observing whether the treatment stops the symptoms.The best laboratory animal would not only get infected and get sick, but get sick in the same way that humans do, showing a similar course of disease. Then a test would give the most information.Dr. Perlman pointed out that the hACE2 strain of mice susceptible to SARS got sick, “but developed a brain disease” in addition to other symptoms. A new study from China, not yet peer-reviewed, suggests that these mice do get infected with the new pandemic virus, which is called SARS-CoV-2, and develop mild pneumonia. The paper made no mention of the virus affecting the brain.This strain of mice will be used in some of the first laboratory experiments. But first it is necessary to breed them. Like many other genetically engineered mice varieties, scientists don’t keep live colonies on hand. Instead the mice’s frozen sperm and embryos are kept ready.The hACE2 mice were put on ice when the SARS outbreak stopped in the early 2000s. Chien-Te Tseng at the University of Texas Medical Branch, who independently developed an hACE2 mouse, is now building up a colony from frozen embryos in his lab. Mice have a three-week gestation period, or pregnancy, and take eight weeks to reach sexual maturity.Dr. Perlman is not rejuvenating the strain himself. He sent 16 vials of frozen sperm to the Jackson Laboratory in Maine, one of the biggest breeders of laboratory animals, so they can ramp up their production.They hope to have mice ready for distribution, at cost, by May, according to Cat Lutz, director of the mouse repository, with responsibility for thousands of strains of mice, including the hACE2.The advantage of this strain is that it has a human receptor on its cells called an ACE2 receptor, thus its name. That allows it to be infected with SARS and the new coronavirus, which both target that receptor as they try to invade cells.“There’s a huge demand,” Dr. Lutz said, “not only in the United States, but globally.”Dr. Lutz said that researchers at the Jackson Laboratory will also be investigating other ways to make mice more susceptible to the new coronavirus.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“There’s never only one mouse model that we use.” For diabetes she said, “we have eight different models that we’ll look at depending on the answer that we want to ask. And I think the same is going to be true in this circumstance as well.”Dr. Michael Diamond, in infectious disease specialist at Washington University in St. Louis, is also planning to do research with the hACE2 mouse, and other strains.He said that although mice take time to breed, creating a supply of them is still quicker than using larger animals. Mice, he said, may help scientists “to sort of winnow down some of the candidates” for vaccines.Dr. Diamond also said that groups around the globe are pursuing many of the same goals. At first it might seem redundant, but because there are so many unanticipated problems that arise in vaccine and treatment tests, redundancy is a feature of the scientific process rather than a drawback.Inevitably, he said, vaccine and treatment researchers will move to other animals, perhaps hamsters and ferrets, but certainly monkeys, which are most likely to replicate how the disease progresses in humans. All work with the live virus takes place in level 3 biosecure labs, Dr. Diamond said.Dave O’Connor, a pathologist at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, is working with colleagues to test the usefulness of monkeys in the study of coronavirus treatments. He said that a Chinese group had already published some data on rhesus macaques and he had heard that more results from other labs around the world would be coming soon.Those results would be on the suitability of primates for laboratory tests, not on immediate cures. “This is not the movie ‘Contagion’ where there will be a magic discovery in a monkey that allows everyone to recover immediately,” he said.