A Tiger Is Slightly Sick With the Coronavirus. Your Cats Are Probably OK.
By James GormanWhen a tiger tests positive for the novel coronavirus, the immediate question is: What about other cats?Nadia, a 4-year-old Malayan tiger who had a dry cough and a slight loss of appetite, tested positive for the virus that has caused a human pandemic, the Bronx Zoo reported on Sunday.She is doing well, according to Dr. Paul Calle, the Bronx Zoo’s chief veterinarian. So are three other tigers and three lions that show the same symptoms. And, he said, neither Nadia’s infection nor early scientific reports from China of infections among domestic cats should make cat owners fear for their pets, or fear that the cats may pass the virus to humans.“None of them actually ever acted terribly sick,” Dr. Calle said on Monday of the zoo’s infected cats. But there are many respiratory ailments specific to cats, and the zoo anesthetized Nadia, took samples and sent them for testing to veterinary colleges at Cornell and the University of Illinois, and then to the National Veterinary Services Laboratory, for confirmation. The results came back positive.The test is not the same as the one used for humans, Dr. Calle said, so testing the tiger did not interfere with human testing. “You cannot send human samples to the veterinary laboratory, and you cannot send animal tests to the human laboratories,” he said, “so there is no competition for testing between these very different situations.” Dr. Calle noted that there had been several experiments in which domestic cats were inoculated with large amounts of the coronavirus, but “that does not replicate what is happening in people’s homes around the world.” The amount of virus the cats were given, directly into the nose, was quite high.He added, “If cats were generally susceptible, there would have been lots of reports in the preceding months about that.”Karen A. Terio is the chief of the Zoological Pathology Program at the University of Illinois veterinary college, where tests for the tiger were done. “Given the number of people in this country that have been infected with the virus and have become ill, and the number of people in this country that own domestic cats,” she said, “it seems fairly improbable that cats are an important source of the virus for people if the first case we’re diagnosing it in is a tiger.”Confirmed human cases are well over one million worldwide, and they are still increasing. There has been one report from Belgium of a cat that had symptoms of the coronavirus, but the report was unclear, Dr. Calle said. Hong Kong also reported that one cat tested positive for the coronavirus.A study of feral cats in Wuhan, not yet peer reviewed, showed that some had antibodies to the coronavirus, indicating some level of exposure to the virus and some response by their immune systems. But the cats were not ill when tested. None of this is too surprising, according to Dr. Jonathan Epstein of the environmental health nonprofit EcoHealth Alliance, who said laboratory experiments showed that cats were susceptible to infection with SARS, another coronavirus.However, Dr. Calle said it was important to keep things in perspective. “There’s no evidence anywhere, other than the initial spillover, that any animal has infected any person anywhere,” he said.The U.S. Agriculture Department, the World Organization for Animal Health and the American Veterinary Medical Association all say on their websites that there is so far no evidence that domestic animals can pass on an infection to people. But they all advise that people who are sick should take the same precautions about contact with their pets that they would with humans.“There’s still a lot we don’t know,” Dr. Terio said. “We’re all trying to play catch up and learn about this virus in real time, as things are happening.”Dr. Epstein emphasized that it was still unclear what level of infection cats might have and whether they might transmit it to one another, which has been suggested. He said the worldwide pandemic was being driven by human-to-human transmission, but advised, as other experts do, to “treat cats as other family members.”“There’s no evidence yet that cats can transmit this virus to people,” he said. “But you don’t want to take this chance in the absence of information.”Scientists at various labs are looking at animal susceptibility, both in terms of pets and with an eye to what animals could be used in laboratory studies. The same preliminary, unreviewed study that found cats susceptible in the laboratory also found that the virus reproduces poorly in dogs, pigs, chickens and ducks.Among animals that may be used in laboratory tests, the novel coronavirus infects genetically engineered mice as well as some monkeys. Chimpanzee sanctuaries in the United States have stopped tours and reduced staff members’ interactions with their animals in case apes may be vulnerable, too. Ferrets are yet another potential laboratory animal. A report accepted for publication in Cell Host & Microbe documents that ferrets both become infected and pass the virus on to one another, showing some symptoms similar to those of humans, such as a fever, lethargy and coughing. All the animals recovered, however.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Jae Jung, a microbiologist at the Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, was one of the authors on that paper. He said that mice are likely to be on the front lines of testing, particularly for new drugs or vaccines. Established drugs or vaccines that are similar to previous ones used in humans may go straight to human trials.In genetically engineered mice, the virus appears in all cells, and the symptoms of the mice are not similar to those of humans. Monkeys, Dr. Jung said, are close to humans, but they can be used only in small numbers. Ferrets are particularly useful, because, like monkeys, they do not need to be genetically engineered, but they are easier to raise in a lab than monkeys and the structure of their breathing system is similar in some ways to that of humans. They become infected in the lungs, as humans do.Ferrets have been used in influenza research and in research on SARS, partly because they cough and, Dr. Jung found, can pass the virus to one another. They may be useful to study how the virus is transmitted.Dr. Jung said the ferrets showed a fever and lethargy and “occasionally coughing.” Around Day 10 or 12 of infection, he said, “they all recovered.”The primary scientific importance of understanding how the virus acts in animals is to learn more about it for human prevention and treatment. But the knowledge can also have an impact on the animals themselves.Public health agencies and those concerned with animal welfare worry about a backlash against pets if people are worried that their animals might become infected. The World Organization for Animal Health urges people not to turn against their pets, saying, “There is no justification in taking measures against companion animals which may compromise their welfare.”Although shelters in the United States reported an increase in adoptions as many states and localities required social isolation, Meredith Ayan, the executive director of the animal rescue nonprofit SPCA International, said her organization had received anecdotal reports of increased numbers of stray dogs in Italy and Hubei Province, in China. None of the reports were from systematic surveys, and it was not clear what the reason for the increase might have been. Owners could have been in hospitals or died. People may have lost work and been unable to feed their animals. 