Quarantined Runners Log Miles in Backyards and Living Rooms
By Christine HauserSelf-quarantine can be an opportunity to make the most of a sedentary day. Learn a new language online. Take up knitting. Get through that stack of books you have been meaning to read.Or you can leave the cocoon of your couch and join the worldwide tribe of lockdown runners who are trying to adapt to the challenges of confinement.Social distancing has forced runners to innovate, whether they are casual hobbyists releasing the pent-up steam of cabin fever or elite athletes trying to maintain their mileage.Improvised tracks are being carved out in living rooms, and on rooftops and balconies. Indoor treadmills are getting hammered. Distances are being clocked vertically in apartment building stairwells.James Campbell, a former javelin athlete in England, saw opportunity in the 21-foot stretch of grass and gravel in his backyard. As his mind ricocheted with boredom from being cooped up inside his Cheltenham home last month, a question dawned.“What was the most stupid thing I can do to create a little bit of excitement for myself?” Mr. Campbell recalled asking himself. “I will run a marathon in my garden.”And so he did. Mr. Campbell put down duct tape to mark a circuit of laps. He set up drinks and snacks on tables, rigged equipment for an online watch party and created a link for donations to support the National Health Service’s coronavirus efforts.At just after 9 a.m. on April 1, Mr. Campbell, 32, set off. He jogged, looped and circled. Sometimes he trudged backward, or in a figure-eight pattern. His neighbors watched from the fence. His online fans urged him on. A GPS device tracked his progress.“I just kept going,” he said.Five hours and five minutes later, he had put in 26.2 miles.Mr. Campbell said he had not been a serious runner before his feat, but that he kept fit in a gym and had been working out at home before his backyard marathon.The lockdown rules dictated by the coronavirus pandemic mean many runners are getting their fix by logging their miles in tight circles, like a hamster on a wheel, to avoid contact. Runs once displayed as long courses on Strava now appear as thick dots or zigzags, reflecting routes dictated by space constraints.Some runners eschewing the outdoors have bought rowing machines, stationary bicycles or step-climbing equipment, anything to stay in motion while not going anywhere.Tammy Whyte, a running coach based in Washington, D.C., said she was giving online fitness classes to her athletes. “There are a lot of ways to get your heart rate up inside,” she said.“Some runners are using running as a way to relieve stress right now,” she said. “You can do little laps in a balcony or stairs or a little yard.”Fears of infection and the need for social distancing have also spurred new rules of etiquette, especially as concerns grow over how much of a distance from other runners is considered safe.Some runners are wearing a Buff, a versatile tubular garment popular in the sport, to cover their mouth and nose. Others wear masks and gloves, and think twice about where and when to clear their throats or spit during long runs.And others are practicing the “coronavirus swerve,” giving people a wide berth on streets, sidewalks and trails.Michael Wardian, 45, an elite ultramarathon runner who lives in Arlington, Va., said he no longer goes on group runs or meets with a personal trainer as part of his routine.“It has completely changed,” he said.His strenuous off-road runs have been transformed. “Even my secret hidden trials are overrun with people now, because everyone has found the outside,” Mr. Wardian said. “Places where I would go for solitude are not as conducive for that.”Rob Tidwell, 49, of King George, Va., and his family have also reassessed the tracts of wilderness they once plied, giving up their forest and Shenandoah mountain routes and sticking instead to their neighborhood, which has become the more remote spot.“People are flocking to the parks and trails are getting closed,” he said. “The last time we went out of our neighborhood to the park, it was packed with people.”For Anna Carlsson, 34, a long distance runner, the opposite is true. Her favorite wilderness spots have been abandoned as visitors stopped traveling to her village of Abisko, Sweden, near the Arctic Circle.Ms. Carlsson said she would normally not be putting in miles near Abisko at this time of year. But with marathons canceled, she saw no need to trek south for her usual spring training.Instead, she is making do with the slippery mountain tracks carved out by snowmobiles, or sprinting across the frozen surface of Lake Tornetrask.“A lot of tourists are usually here at this time of year because of the northern lights,” she said. “But right now it is super quiet.”But Ms. Carlsson and others are still finding a way to be competitive, as races crop up online to replace the isolation-averse contests on public streets, where spectators press against barricades and runners move in dense packs.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Ms. Carlsson was one of more than 2,413 people in 56 countries who took part in a virtual race, the Quarantine Backyard Ultra, this month, distant in geography but united online from their living rooms, backyards and neighborhood streets.In Dubai, a Russian man ran around his living room for 20 hours. A Canadian, Matt Shepard, wanted to avoid frostbite so he ran part of the race inside a coffee shop in Valleyview, Alberta, that had been closed because of the coronavirus pandemic. Greg Armstrong, of Lebanon, Tenn., had to pause on his treadmill at one point to remove a snake from his house.The goal was to complete 4.17 miles at any pace in each of 63 consecutive hours of running, or a total of just over 262 miles. The overall winner would be “the last person standing,” said Stephanie Gillis-Paulgaard, an organizer.At 9 a.m. on April 4, Mr. Wardian, the runner from Virginia, set off on a loop of less than a half-mile around his house. As he passed again and again, his neighbors rang bells and cheered from a distance.It was a close finish. On April 6 at 11:31 p.m., Mr. Wardian won after a Czech competitor on a treadmill, Radek Brunner, was disqualified on a technicality after he began his 63rd hour too late after the starting bell, Ms. Gillis-Paulgaard said.“At the end it was down to me and one incredible athlete,” Mr. Wardian said in a video message on Twitter. “Radek was pushing me beyond anything I think both of us had ever done in the past.”