Deciding to Postpone the Olympics Was Tough. Actually Moving Them May Be Tougher.
By Andrew Keh, Motoko Rich and Tariq PanjaPostponing the Olympics, the largest sporting event in the world, in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic was a widely accepted move, the acknowledgment of a chorus of worried voices around the world.Actually moving the massive Tokyo Games, though, presents an entirely new set of challenges, a jigsaw puzzle of logistics for organizers to assemble in relatively short order.“We will make sure not to inconvenience people as much as possible,” Toshiro Muto, the chief executive of Tokyo 2020, said after Olympic organizers delayed the Games to 2021.For many reasons, that seems easier said than done.Postponing the Games until 2021, for instance, risks scheduling clashes with the world championship events of two of the biggest Olympic sports, track and field and swimming. Though officials did not specify new dates for the Tokyo Games, they were originally planned for July 24 to Aug. 9, so a shift of exactly 12 months would create certain conflict, absent more maneuvering.The governing bodies of the two sports rely on their world championship events as vital sources of income, but both released public statements signaling their intention to work with the I.O.C. and, if necessary, to shift the dates of their events.Track and field’s World Athletics Championships are scheduled to begin Aug. 6, 2021, in Eugene, Oregon, and in a statement, World Athletics said it was already working to “ensure that Oregon is able to host the World Athletics Championships on alternative dates, should that prove necessary.”The world championships of swimming are scheduled to start July 16, 2021, in Fukuoka, Japan. FINA, the sport’s governing body, said in a statement that it plans to work with the Japanese Swimming Federation and public officials there “in order to determine flexibility around the dates of the competition, if necessary and in agreement with the I.O.C.”The Olympics have been canceled during wartime, but never postponed.Faced with this fresh challenge, international sports federations were sent scrambling on Tuesday to figure out how to shift qualification processes that were already halfway done. About 57 percent of athletes had qualified for the Games already, and questions swirled about whether their spots would remain secure for 2021, and what the new qualification parameters might look like across dozens of sports.Athletes around the world began deciding whether the 2021 Games still fit into their life plans. And organizers in Japan began pondering which logistical plans could stay intact for another year.“There is not a book you can go to now and say, ‘OK, here’s Plan B,’” said Terrence Burns, a longtime Olympic bid consultant. “Right now there is a blank piece of paper.”Burns said Japan was lucky that its Games were essentially ready to go and that many components of the event — transportation, security, housing, and others — were already in place to some extent.“They have all the ingredients for the cake in the pan; they just have to wait another year to put it in the oven,” said Burns, who also noted that the organizers were lucky to have found sponsors and to have raised funds already.Yet while the postponement helps to save Japan’s investment, it could still incur some significant costs. Muto said, for instance, that many of the venues that had been leased for this year would have to be extended for another year.“Our plan was to return all of the Games venues once we had finished,” Muto said. “So to hire them again means we have to pay additional costs for them and we might have to hire people until next year.”And, Muto noted, “quite a lot” of the venues have already been booked for next year, meaning those scheduling conflicts would have to be resolved in order for those facilities to be secured.Who exactly would pay for all of that, Muto added, was still up for discussion.The needs of ticket holders, many of whom entered popular lotteries, as well as those volunteers who had planned on traveling to Tokyo from around the world, were also being considered, but there were no answers yet to give.“Our policy is going to be, as much as possible, to make sure that people who have already bought tickets and people who have already been chosen as volunteers will get a special consideration,” Muto said, while acknowledging that some people who. have been planning to attend the 2020 Games for several years might not be able to adjust to new dates.Anbritt Stengele, the president of Sports Traveler, a company specializing in travel packages to major international sporting events, said she had already been in contact with hotels and other business operators in Tokyo about shifting the company’s contracts to the following year.But Stengele said little progress could be made by her or anyone else planning travel or business around the Olympics until the new dates for the Games were announced.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“I think they have to come up with a date pretty soon,” Stengele said. “There are millions of ticket holders all over the world, and they need some definitive solutions.”The I.O.C. could also face some financial costs. The Summer Olympics are the I.O.C.’s most significant source of income, money that it distributes to dozens of sports federations and more than 200 national Olympic bodies. A year’s delay could put those payments in doubt, given that broadcasters, notably NBC, which make up the bulk of its revenue, pay most of their fees close to the start of the Games.In order to meet its costs, and not deplete its reserves more than necessary, the I.O.C. could perhaps ask its broadcast partners and sponsors to make payments earlier than they normally would be expected.NBC, which will have to transform its programming schedule, declined to comment beyond a statement indicating that it understood the decision of the I.O.C. and Japanese government to postpone the Games.After a long awaited announcement, the only thing that seemed certain on Tuesday was that the uncharted territory could potentially change the way the global sports industry is run.