Eva Szekely Dies at 92; Survived Holocaust to Win Olympic Gold
By Daniel E. SlotnikEva Szekely, an Olympic champion swimmer and an athletic hero in her native Hungary, narrowly escaped being murdered by fascists before she could achieve greatness.Already a promising swimmer as a girl, Szekely (pronounced SAY-kay) was forced off her swim team in Budapest in 1941 because she was Jewish. Fascist forces within Hungary made things progressively worse for Jews there, well before the Nazis occupied the country in 1944.An official in the Arrow Cross Party, a Hungarian fascist organization that controlled the country with Nazi support, at one point ordered Szekely to march to the Danube River, where the fascists killed about 20,000 Hungarian Jews that winter. Her father told her to lie down and act too ill to move, then he tried a different tactic.“For some heavenly influence my father said, ‘Don’t take her, she is the swimming champion of Hungary and one day you will be happy you saved her life!’” Szekely told the University of Southern California’s Shoah Foundation Institute in videotaped testimony.Szekely recalled staring into the official’s eyes — one gray, one brown — before he let her live. She survived and fulfilled her father’s prophecy, winning a gold medal in the 200-meter breaststroke at the 1952 Olympics in Helsinki, Finland, and a silver in the same event at the Olympics in Melbourne, Australia, four years later.Szekely died on Feb. 29 at her home in Budapest. She was 92. Her death was confirmed by email by Gergely Csurka, the media manager for the Hungarian Swimming Association.Despite the obstacles she faced, Szekely found a way to train during the war. According to her entry in the Encyclopedia of Jewish Women, she endured part of the war in a crowded, Swiss-run safe house in Budapest, where she ran up and down five flights of stairs 100 times every morning.Szekely entered international competition soon after the war ended in 1945, and won dozens of swimming titles beginning in 1946. Her Olympics career began at the 1948 Games in London, where she finished fourth in the 200-meter breaststroke.Two years later, she had a chilling encounter after winning an international swim meet in Hungary. She was told that in addition to her gold medal she would receive a special prize from an important officer of the Communist political police. As she stood atop the dais, the officer handed her the trophy and made eye contact with her. “And it was that Arrow Cross man,” she said, “with his different color eyes! I thought I would fall off the platform!”Early in Szekely’s competitive days she met Dezso Gyarmati, an extraordinary water polo player who helped Hungary win five Olympic medals, including gold, at the 1952, ’56 and ’64 Games. They married in 1950 and had a daughter, Andrea Gyarmati, in 1954.At the 1952 Olympics, Szekely set an Olympic record in the 200-meter breaststroke with a time of 2:51.7 as part of a dominant Hungarian women’s swim team, which won gold in four out of five events.Before they left for the 1956 Games in Melbourne, an anti-Communist revolt, quickly quelled by the Kremlin, roiled Hungary and prevented athletes from training in the last weeks before the competition.Once in Australia, Szekely and Gyarmati, an outspoken supporter of the uprising, were racked with anxiety, having left their daughter behind in Hungary. Szekely reportedly lost more than 10 pounds during the Games. Still, she managed to win silver in the 200-meter breaststroke, becoming the only member of the once-formidable Hungarian women’s team to earn a medal at Melbourne.Many Hungarian athletes opted to remain in Australia or defect to other countries once they learned that the Soviets had prevailed back home, but Szekely and Gyarmati returned to their daughter. They defected to the United States after a visit to Vienna in 1957, but soon returned to Hungary to care for Szekely’s aging parents.Szekely retired from competition not long after the 1956 Olympics and became a pharmacist and swimming coach. One of her most successful students was her daughter, Andrea, who went on to an Olympic swimming career of her own, winning a silver medal in the 100-meter backstroke and a bronze in the 100-meter butterfly at the 1972 Games in Munich.Szekely accompanied her daughter to Munich, where she met a member of Israel’s Olympic delegation shortly before Palestinian terrorists killed him, 10 other Israeli athletes and coaches, and a West German police officer.Two years after the Munich attacks, Szekely spoke in a nationally televised interview about how she had responded in the early 1940s to questions about her background.“Unequivocally, I was a Jew,” she said.Eva Szekely was born in Budapest on Apr. 3, 1927, to Andor and Maria (Schwitzer) Szekely. Her father owned a shop that sold metal goods; her mother was a homemaker. Eva’s fascination with swimming began when she was young.“Water was the real world where I really felt comfortable and absolutely safe,” she once said in an interview. “I usually said that I should have been a fish.”Her love of competitive swimming grew after a fellow Hungarian, Ferenc Csik, won a gold medal in the 100-meter freestyle at the 1936 Olympics in Berlin.She studied pharmacology at Semmelweis University and at what is now the University of Physical Education in Budapest.Her marriage to Gyarmati ended in divorce. She is survived by her daughter; a grandson, Mate Hesz, a talented water polo player; and a great-granddaughter.Szekely and Gyarmati were inducted into the International Swimming Hall of Fame in 1976, as was their daughter in 1995.Szekely said her athletic life had been “a safe house against” the depredations she had faced under the Nazis and the Communists.