NASCAR Races Into an Uncertain Future
By Victor MatherAs NASCAR readies for its first, and most important, event of the year, the Daytona 500 on Sunday, it sits at a crossroads. It has hundreds of thousands of passionate and fiercely loyal fans. But the days when it was on the brink of joining the major American sports seem past.Over the past few years, just about all of NASCAR’s biggest-name drivers, the ones whose fame transcended the sport and crossed over into mainstream appearances on talk shows and in commercials, have stepped away. Jeff Gordon retired in 2015 and Tony Stewart in 2016. Dale Earnhardt Jr. will be the honorary starter at Daytona this year, but he last raced in the series in 2017.Next to join them will be Jimmie Johnson, who won seven championships including five in a row and is now starting his final season at age 44.Although Danica Patrick did not win a NASCAR race in her four years in the sport, her high profile as the first woman with a full-time ride in the series and heavy presence in advertisements brought added attention to the series from 2013 to 2017.There was excitement about another trailblazer, Bubba Wallace, the first full-time black driver since the 1970s. But after two seasons in the top series, he has just four top 10 finishes and no wins.“Yes, it’s really important to us,” said Steve Phelps, NASCAR’s president, of star drivers. “It is critical to the success of the sport moving forward.”The last two years fans have chosen as their favorite driver Chase Elliott, perhaps as much because he is the son of the phenomenally popular NASCAR legend Bill Elliott than for his 10th, 6th, and 5th place finishes in the standings the last three years.The second place finisher in the voting was Kyle Busch, the 2019 champion. He clearly has his fans, but he is a polarizing figure, often drawing boos, for his brash outspokenness and aggressive driving. The previous two champions, Joey Logano and Martin Truex, have also not been able to break through into mainstream sports fame.The 2019 Daytona 500 drew about 9 million viewers. Yes, sports ratings as a whole are down, but NASCAR’s fall is alarming: Daytona 500 viewership from 2001 to 2009 ranged from 16 to 19 million. And as recently as 2013, the race drew 16.5 million with Patrick on the pole (she finished eighth).The average NASCAR race draws about three million viewers, up slightly from last year when comparing apples to apples, NASCAR said, but down significantly from the kinds of numbers the sport was putting up a few years ago. In the first year of the current TV contract with Fox and NBC, 2015, it averaged more than five million. That 10-year TV contract expires in 2024.NASCAR releases no official attendance figures, but the high-capacity stands at its tracks appear much less full than they were 10 years ago, and at many tracks sections have been closed off.“When you’ve got 146,000 seats that’s hard to fill for any sport,” Phelps said, referring to the cavernous Bristol Motor Speedway. “We have as many or more people in the stands than any other sporting event.”President Trump will attend the race Sunday, becoming the second sitting president to do so, after President George W. Bush in 2004.The sport has not been afraid to make changes, adding a “playoffs” to the series in 2004 and tinkering with its rules regularly.For the coming season, the most notable change has been to move the second Daytona race from the Fourth of July Weekend, a date it occupied for decades — it was once known as the Firecracker 400 — to the last race of the regular season.At Daytona and Talladega, another large track, which is in Alabama, the cars reach higher speeds with drivers going full throttle. Drafting is enhanced, and as a result, the whole field tends to race very close together, increasing excitement and sometimes leading to what fans call “the big one,” a crash with multiple cars. Last season at the Daytona 500, there were three big wrecks in the last 25 miles.Some fans enjoy the spectacle of big crashes, and many more enjoy that at those tracks at which the winner is hard to predict. That was the chief motivation for shifting the second Daytona race.“Daytona is truly a race that anyone can win,” said Kevin Harvick, the 2007 Daytona winner. “You have to have some luck on your side. Not knowing who’s going to make the playoffs until that race is over is really great for our sport.”Phelps agreed.“At Richmond or Indy the chance of someone getting into the playoffs was very low,” he said. “We’ve got more casual fans that want to be entertained.”In the bulk of NASCAR races, away from the superspeedways, races can sometimes fall into predictable patterns. Often six or seven drivers quickly pull away, and after 20 to 30 laps, most of field is essentially eliminated.That is compounded by the gap between the top teams and the rest. Joe Gibbs Racing had three of the four drivers contesting the championship on the last day of the 2019 season, Busch, Truex and Denny Hamlin. Just behind Gibbs was Team Penske, with the fifth, seventh and eighth place drivers.But like most races on superspeedways, the Daytona 500 on Sunday will be much harder to predict.For this year’s Daytona, oddsmakers say that no driver is a shorter price than 10-1, with Logano, Busch, Elliott, defending champion Hamlin and Brad Keselowski all in the mix. As many as 20 drivers are at 25-1 or shorter. Ricky Stenhouse Jr., who finished no better than fifth in any NASCAR top-circuit race last year, earned the pole.Another major change for 2020 is the name of the series itself. NASCAR has been closely identified with a title sponsor, Winston, for decades, and most recently Monster Energy. But for 2020 the series will be known simply as the “NASCAR Cup Series.”“One reason was to get our own brand back,” Phelps said. “You don’t want to promote another brand. We will not have a title sponsor for any time in the foreseeable future.”Looking ahead to 2021, NASCAR expects to shift to a new car, known as “Next Gen.” The change will be significant enough that Autoweek called the 2020 season “a lame duck campaign.”“The biggest thing we fight in our sport is cost,” Harvick said. “This car hopefully brings in other manufacturers. The more manufacturers we have in the sport, the better it is for everyone.”“It will put the stock back in stock car,” Phelps said of the new car. “It will look like a souped-up showroom car.”