What’s That Racket on the Roof?
An improvised tennis court above the streets of Italy, a Tom Brady sighting and one-liners on Twitter. Here’s your day of (no) sports.By Danielle AllentuckRoof. Set. Match.After their tennis club in Finale Ligure, Italy, was shut down in early March, Vittoria Oliveri, 14, and Carola Pessina, 11, were challenged to come up with a way to stay in shape. Their teammates (and Roger Federer) posted videos of themselves hitting balls against walls or practicing in stairwells.Vittoria and Carola took it to the next level, creating a court between their rooftops. They had to avoid various objects, like boiler vents, as they played.“It was their idea,” their coach, Dionisio Poggi, told Agence France-Presse. “They know each other well, they’re friends, and they live in neighboring buildings.”The video went viral.It was posted on the ATP Tour’s Twitter page, where it has been viewed 9.1 million times. Tennis greats like Tracy Austin tweeted out their admiration.“This is next level #TennisAtHome,” Austin said. “I don’t think this can be topped. Keep the ball deep.”Federer and Rafael Nadal, you’re up next.Come on, guys, these quarantining rules are serious business. And the authorities aren’t going to just let them slide. Even if you’re Tom Brady.Brady, of course, is now a Tampa, Fla., resident. He is staying at Derek Jeter’s mansion, which has seven bedrooms, nine bathrooms and more than 30,000 square feet.He was exercising in a public park in his new hometown only to be approached by a worker who told him the park was closed.In a news briefing, Mayor Jane Castor of Tampa said: “Our parks are closed down, and so a lot of our park staff, they patrol around just to make sure that people aren’t in contact sports and things. They saw an individual working out in one of our downtown parks and she went over to tell him it was closed, and it was Tom Brady.”Mayor Rick Kriseman of Tampa’s sister city, St. Petersburg, who was also at the briefing, responded with unfeigned excitement, “Oh my goodness. Wow!”In a tweet, the city of Tampa said: “Sorry Tom Brady! Our Tampa Parks and Rec team can’t wait to welcome you and our entire community back with even bigger smiles — until then, stay safe and stay home as much as you can to help flatten the curve.”He was sighted, the city confirmed, not cited. There was no immediate comment from Brady on the park incident. VICTOR MATHERIt probably isn’t fair to call Rudy Gobert the Patient Zero of the coronavirus in sports. But he was one of the first high-profile athletes to contract it. And before testing positive he had made light of the virus by jokingly touching every reporter’s microphone and notebook at a news conference.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.His positive test was also the immediate cause of the N.B.A.’s shutting down its season on March 11. And a teammate, Donovan Mitchell, soon tested positive as well. (Both players are now clear of the virus.)Gobert, whose case of coronavirus was mild, is back to joking around, although this time thankfully without potentially putting anyone in danger.It started when Evan Fournier of the Orlando Magic, a close friend of Gobert’s who has defended him in recent weeks, elected to shave his beard. Perhaps Fournier thought he now looked a bit like Freddie Mercury; he wrote a caption for a photograph of his new look with the title of a Queen song, “I Want to Break Free.”Gobert disagreed, thinking Fournier looked more like a waiter. He retweeted the photo with a quip in French: “I’ll have salad with tomato, onion and samurai sauce, and a small fries, s’il vous plait.” (Samurai sauce, popular in France, is made of mayonnaise, ketchup and chili peppers.)Twitter has, of course, replaced the Catskills as the spiritual home of the one-liner, and many athletes with time on their hands are using it to try out new material. The hard-living golfer John Daly created a minor stir when he advocated drinking a bottle of vodka a day as a way to get rid of the coronavirus. The situation was magnified when Trump Golf retweeted the video.