Updates on Sports Canceled by Coronavirus
By Victor MatherA day after nearly every major sporting event in the United States had been suspended or canceled because of the coronavirus, it became a question of which sports were on, not which were off.One of the biggest sporting events of the year, the Masters golf tournament, will be postponed, it was announced Friday.The Boston Marathon will be rescheduled for September.The N.B.A., the N.H.L., M.L.S. and Major League Baseball suspended play. The N.C.A.A. canceled all of its championships, including the men’s basketball tournament, which supplies most of its annual budget.Around Europe, more leagues shut down their seasons, joining Asia, which has been almost without sporting events for weeks.And looming over all the decisions was the Summer Olympics, still planned to begin as scheduled in Tokyo in late July, even as qualifying events were being canceled around the world.Here’s the latest in sports:The Masters will be postponed, according to an announcement Friday from officials at Augusta National Golf Club, the host of the event.On Thursday night, the PGA Tour, which conducts the bulk of the professional golf events in North America, announced it was canceling several tournaments and suspending operations until the week of the Masters, which is scheduled for April 9 to 12.“We hope this postponement puts us in the best position to safely host the Masters tournament and our amateur events at some later date,” tournament organizers said in a statement.The Masters is the first golf major championship of the year and has been played every year since 1934, except from 1943 to 1945, when it was canceled because of World War II.Tiger Woods, in one of the most memorable sporting events of 2019, came from behind to win the tournament last year. It was Woods’s 15th major championship. Woods has been sidelined in recent weeks resting his surgically repaired back.After initially announcing that the Players Championship in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., another of its important events, would proceed without fans, the PGA Tour decided late Thursday to cancel it as well as its next three events in Florida and Texas. An event in the Dominican Republic had been canceled earlier in the day.Earlier Thursday, Jay Monahan, the commissioner of the PGA Tour, had said that since golf is an outdoor sport played in a vast expanse — the T.P.C.-Sawgrass golf course is more than 400 acres — it made for “a safe environment.”The L.P.G.A. Tour had previously announced the postponement of three events in the United States, having previously canceled two Asian events.The Premier League in England became the latest soccer league to suspend games, after Mikel Arteta, the manager of Arsenal, and the Chelsea player Callum Hudson-Odoi tested positive for the virus. (Arteta tweeted Friday that he was “feeling better already.”Games will not be played in the top four divisions until April 3. Scotland also suspended its games. Arsenal, Chelsea and Everton have all quarantined some players.England and Scotland join almost every other major league in Europe, including France, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and a host of smaller countries.Germany was the last major league to surrender to the tide of cancellations, deciding Friday to stop games until April 2.All Champions League and Europa League games have been suspended indefinitely.Most Asian countries suspended play some weeks ago, and with Major League Soccer suspended, that leaves games for the most part only in Mexico, Africa and some of South America, for now.Besides the suspension of M.L.S., United States men’s and women’s team friendlies in March and April have been canceled.Formula One canceled its season-opening race in Australia. (Australian rules football there will start its season, but without fans.)Races in China, Bahrain and Vietnam were postponed, meaning the season would open in May at the earliest.NASCAR postponed its race in Atlanta this weekend and Miami next week. IndyCar suspended races through April.Thursday started with the dominolike cancellation of just about every college conference tournament. The first game of the Big East tournament quarterfinals tipped off as scheduled at Madison Square Garden, but the tournament was canceled at halftime.Then late Thursday afternoon, the national basketball tournaments were scrapped. All other winter and spring college championships were also canceled.Donovan Mitchell became the second N.B.A. player known to have tested positive for the coronavirus. The N.B.A. suspended its season after the first, another Jazz player, Rudy Gobert, tested positive.Adam Silver, the N.B.A. commissioner, said the league’s suspension would probably last “at least 30 days.” Silver said it was possible that the rest of the season would be canceled.The top European basketball competition, Euroleague, suspended all games until April 11.The Miami Open, one of the top tennis tournaments in the country, was canceled on Thursday. Its cancellation came after one of the world’s leading tennis tournaments, the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif., was also canceled. Soon after, the governing body of men’s tennis suspended tour events for six weeks, until April 27.The Fed Cup finals, scheduled for Budapest in April, have been postponed. WTA events will not be held until April 6.Following the lead of other major sports leagues, the National Hockey League announced Thursday that it was pausing its season, effective immediately. The N.H.L. did not indicate how long the stoppage would last or when it would try to begin play again, saying only that the league’s goal was “to resume play as soon as it is appropriate and prudent.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Most N.H.L. teams have about a dozen games left in the regular season, with the Stanley Cup playoffs scheduled to begin in about a month.The National Women’s Hockey League said its Isobel Cup final between the Boston Pride and the Minnesota Whitecaps, set for Friday, had been postponed.The N.F.L. canceled its annual owners’ meeting scheduled for March 29 to April 1 in Palm Beach, Fla., and opted to carry over much of its agenda to their meeting in late May.The meeting includes owners, coaches and general managers, and attracts hundreds of news media members from around the country. The league said in a statement that it would continue “essential business operations” but would consult with experts on new developments. No mention was made of changes to plans for the N.F.L. draft, which is slated to take place April 23 to 25 in Las Vegas.President Trump added his voice to the conversation on Thursday, suggesting that the Games in Tokyo should be postponed for a year rather than being held without spectators. Thomas Bach, president of the International Olympic Committee, has insisted that the Games are on schedule to begin in late July, though a member of Japan’s Olympic organizing committee said Tuesday that postponing the Games should be discussed.“Maybe they postpone it for a year,” Mr. Trump said of the Olympics. “Maybe that’s not possible.”Mr. Trump’s comments came during a news briefing at the White House, where he talked about numerous measures his administration and others were taking to combat the spread of the coronavirus.The Olympic flame lighting ceremony in Greece on Thursday was held without spectators, and the torch relay was suspended Friday morning after larger crowds than expected turned up to watch.Major League Baseball postponed the start of its regular season, scheduled for March 26, by at least two weeks and canceled all remaining spring training games.Japan has postponed the start of its baseball season, scheduled for March 20, until April.The Boston Marathon, a spring staple on the sports calendar, will instead be held on Sept. 14. The New York City Half Marathon, scheduled for Sunday, has been canceled. The London Marathon was delayed until October. The Paris and Barcelona Marathons have also been delayed until October. The Rome Marathon on March 29 has been canceled.The World Figure Skating Championships in Montreal, scheduled to run March 18 to 22, have been canceled. The event was expected to feature about 200 skaters from more than 50 countries.The women’s world ice hockey championship, to be played in Canada beginning March 31, has been canceled. The Alpine World Cup finals, scheduled to begin March 18 in Italy, have been canceled. The last three races of the women’s skiing World Cup, to be held in Sweden, were canceled.The Indian Premier League, the richest league in the world, in a country where cricket’s popularity is off the charts, postponed the start of its season until April 15.England called off its tour of Sri Lanka, which had already begun with exhibition matches. “These are completely unprecedented times, and decisions like this go beyond cricket,” the English Cricket Board said in a statement. South Africa and India canceled international games as well.