M.L.B. Employees Become the Subjects of a Huge Coronavirus Study
By James WagnerMajor League Baseball employees, from players to stadium workers to executives, are participating this week in a 10,000-person study aimed at understanding how many people in various parts of the United States have been infected with the coronavirus.Each participant will have a finger pricked to produce blood that will be tested for the presence of antibodies, which indicates a past infection even in people who have never displayed symptoms of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. The test for the virus itself can reveal only a current infection.One of the biggest hurdles in determining when to reopen parts of the United States is the uncertainty about the number of people who have been infected over all and who, as a result, may now have some sort of immunity.Teams of researchers from Stanford University, the University of Southern California and a prominent antidoping lab in Salt Lake City are collaborating on the study involving M.L.B. They believe it is the first and most extensive research of its kind in the United States.“This kind of study would have taken years to organize outside of this setting,” said Dr. Jay Bhattacharya, a professor of medicine at Stanford who is leading the study. “With the help of M.L.B., we’ve managed to do this in a matter of weeks.”As the coronavirus pandemic spread and sidelined sport after sport, Daniel Eichner, the  president of the Sports Medicine Research and Testing Laboratory in Salt Lake City, realized that his facility would have few, if any, antidoping responsibilities for quite a while.So, Eichner said, his laboratory redirected its focus and ordered large quantities of antibody tests that had been used successfully in some Asian countries.To carry out representative testing, the researchers needed a large group of people who were spread all over the country. Bhattacharya said that he had reached out to an array of corporations, and that M.L.B., which already had a relationship with Eichner, was the quickest to agree. The major leagues, in response to the pandemic, shut down spring training on March 12 and have no specific plans to resume play.“There’s nothing in it for the teams or M.L.B. on this one,” Eichner said. “This is purely to drive public health policy.”Bhattacharya said M.L.B.’s pool of employees offered “a big swath of the American population.” He added that nearly all of M.L.B.’s 30 teams were participating and that it was up to each team to distribute the tests.Because many M.L.B. employees and players live in areas with shelter-in-place rules in effect, many kits have been mailed to participants. The test can produce results in 15 minutes, Bhattacharya said, and photographs documenting the results can be submitted electronically to the researchers.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.A spokesman for the baseball players’ union said the study was “voluntary, strictly part of independent research aimed at gathering data — it’s not connected to resumption of play — and players’ identities will be separated from the data.”In addition to studying the M.L.B. populations, the researchers are using the tests Eichner provided to conduct antibody screening in Los Angeles and in Santa Clara County, Calif.Bhattacharya said he hoped to analyze the data from M.L.B.’s employees and players and write a paper as soon as possible, to help guide the easing of stay-at-home restrictions.