U.F.C. 249 Is Off After Requests From California, Disney and ESPN
By Kevin Draper and Oskar GarciaU.F.C. 249, a mixed-martial arts showcase scheduled for April 18 on Native American tribal land in California, was canceled on Thursday in response to apprehension about holding the event during the coronavirus pandemic. California state officials intervened by directly expressing their concerns about the event to Disney, the parent company of the U.F.C.’s broadcast partner, ESPN, according to three people with knowledge of the conversations.Dana White, the U.F.C. president, said in an interview on ESPN that he had received calls from “the highest level” of leadership at Disney and ESPN asking him not to hold the event, which would have featured 12 fights.ESPN holds the rights to televise U.F.C. fights and to sell its pay-per-view events, a lucrative relationship that yields the vast majority of the U.F.C.’s revenue. “The powers that be there asked me to stand down and not do this event next Saturday,” White said.That request came after Gov. Gavin Newsom of California called Disney officials, according to one of the people familiar with the conversations. The people spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to share the details of the calls.Disney declined to comment, and Newsom’s office did not respond to a request for comment.“ESPN has been in constant contact with the U.F.C. regarding U.F.C. 249,” ESPN said in a statement. “Nobody wants to see sports return more than we do, but we didn’t feel this was the right time for a variety of reasons. ESPN expressed its concerns to the U.F.C. and they understood.”An hour before White announced the cancellation, Senator Dianne Feinstein of California had called for the event to be postponed. In a statement, she said that “at best this event ties up medical resources and sends a message that shelter-in-place orders can be flouted” and that “at worst, participants and support staff could carry the virus back to their home communities and increase its spread.”The card was originally scheduled for Barclays Center in Brooklyn, but was moved after Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York restricted mass gatherings and the New York State Athletic Commission announced it wouldn’t authorize the event,The fights were then to be held at the Tachi Palace Casino Resort, on tribal land in Central California about 40 miles south of Fresno. In staging the event on tribal land, the U.F.C. was attempting to get around stay-at-home orders that have been issued in nearly every state, including California, as well as federal social distancing guidelines.California state regulators refused to authorize the event, and most state athletic commissions aren’t approving fights during the pandemic. As a result, the U.F.C. would have had to provide its own referees, judges, medical staff and other services to make the bouts happen.The Tachi-Yokut Tribe, part of the federally recognized Santa Rosa Indian Community, owns the Tachi Palace Casino Resort. They have sovereignty over their land and can set whatever rules they want, though the casino was closed the night of March 20 because of the pandemic. But because of a nearly 70-year-old federal law, Public Law 280, California state and local officials have broad authority to intervene in criminal and civil matters on tribal land.By expressing their concerns to Disney, California state officials avoided a potentially complicated and uncomfortable situation with the Tachi-Yokut.The U.F.C. had previously canceled three events that were scheduled for March and April, and White said on Thursday that his efforts to keep U.F.C. 249 intact had been “a battle since Day 1.” He has insisted that he was being cautious and could safely hold the fights even amid a pandemic and despite a number of medical, legal and regulatory challenges.As recently as Wednesday night, the event’s key stakeholders were adamant that it would go ahead, noting that the U.F.C. was able to host fights in an empty arena in Brazil last month.“Precedent has been set, and Dana knows that he can pull this off in a very safe and controlled way that will keep his fighters and the crew safe,” Mark Shapiro, the president of Endeavor, said in a telephone interview Wednesday night. Endeavor led the group that purchased the U.F.C. in 2016.Disney is based in Burbank, Calif., and has extensive financial interests in the state, through its theme parks, movie and television studios, and its Pixar and Lucasfilm subsidiaries. ESPN does not control U.F.C.’s fight schedule, but it has substantial influence over the company given the strong financial ties between the two organizations.“These are people that I am partners with, people whom I have a lot of respect with, and I’m going to do it, I’m going to say yes,” White said about the requests from Disney and ESPN to postpone the fight.In 2018, ESPN agreed to pay the U.F.C. $1.5 billion over five years to show 30 events annually on the network’s cable channels and on its ESPN+ streaming service. ESPN executives have credited the U.F.C. with being a major driver of ESPN+ subscriptions, and the agreement was deemed such a success that just one year later it was extended by two years and ESPN also bought the exclusive rights to sell and stream U.F.C.’s pay-per-view events.The value of the latter deal was not announced, but the U.F.C.’s pay-per-view events typically earn hundreds of millions of dollars annually. ESPN was going to charge $64.99 to watch U.F.C. 249.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Shapiro said that business considerations were not behind the U.F.C.’s unwavering desire to hold U.F.C. 249 despite a worldwide pandemic, and that ESPN had not pressured them to go forward. The U.F.C. produces all of its own events, sending video feeds to ESPN to televise, and ESPN would not have had any production staff on the ground in California.“The U.F.C.’s contractual relationship with ESPN has absolutely nothing to do with this decision,” Shapiro said on Wednesday. “ESPN has been clear about that.”The headline fight for U.F.C. 249 was originally a lightweight title bout between Khabib Nurmagomedov and Tony Ferguson, one of the U.F.C.’s most anticipated matchups in years. But Nurmagomedov traveled from San Jose, Calif., where he was training, to his home in the Dagestan region of Russia as White was still trying to find a backup location for the fight. Then Nurmagomedov withdrew when it became clear he would have problems traveling back to the United States to compete.Earlier on Thursday, Brian Butler, the manager of the strawweight fighter Rose Namajunas, said she had withdrawn from her bout in U.F.C. 249 because two of her family members had died. Their deaths, Butler said, “were related to the coronavirus.”Butler added on Instagram, “Her hopes are to return to the octagon as soon as possible.”White said U.F.C. 249 was part of a broader plan to maintain a regular schedule of fights — starting with two months of events at the casino. He said on Thursday that he still planned to hold events for fighters on a private island outside the United States.“Fight island is real — it’s a real thing,” White said. “The infrastructure is being built right now.”