Professional Athletes Trade Sports for TikTok and Toilet Paper
Giannis Antetokounmpo is playing guitar, among other things you didn’t expect to read about in the middle of March.By Victor MatherAnother Monday, another week of global pandemic news, social distancing, political wrangling and no sports.Well, it depends how you define “sport” in this brave new world. Athletes have gotten creative as they try to stay healthy and fill their days.Star athletes, they’re just like us. Really bored.Back during the 1918 flu pandemic, we had no way of knowing what Babe Ruth or Jack Dempsey were up to in their spare time. Thanks to social media, we do now.Barcelona center back (and Shakira’s partner) Gerard Piqué would have been expecting to play in a home game against Leganés over the weekend. Instead, he was bouncing a roll of toilet paper off the edge of his tennis racket as many times as he could. He got to 20. How many can you do? Let’s be honest, you’ve probably got the time.A variant is the Toilet Roll Challenge, in which players use their feet to keep a roll in the air. As you might expect, Lionel Messi does it with some flair. JaVale McGee also got in on the kicking action, but with a faked animated toilet roll.Let’s credit Messi also with some constructive non-toilet-paper-related activity. He is one of two dozen players involved in a World Health Organization campaign to push best practices to fight the coronavirus. “Avoid touching your face, particularly your eyes, nose or mouth to prevent the virus from entering your body,” he says. Hmm, pretty basic advice, but we’ll take it over the tip from the president of FIFA, Gianni Infantino, who said, “We need teamwork to combat the coronavirus.”Of course, this all raises a question: Where did they get their hands on toilet paper?Giannis Antetokounmpo is clearly not a professional guitarist, but he managed to pluck out “Smoke on the Water” to pass the time. Also, LeBron James did a TikTok dance. He certainly can’t play basketball in Hudson County, N.J., where they are removing all the rims.What can you still bet on? The burgeoning American sports gambling market, in which bettors were finally allowed to wager five bucks on a basketball game, has found the new privilege cruelly torn away.On Monday morning at the betting company Betfair, much of the money was on long-term events that will (probably) be contested: the 2022 World Cup (Brazil is a slight favorite over France; the United States is 120-1); Euro 2020 — now Euro 2021 (England, Belgium and France); and the N.B.A. championship (the Lakers, the Bucks and the Clippers).Some bookies are posting “fantasy spreads,” odds on events that are probably not going to happen. SportsBetting.ag has odds on all seven hypothetical games in a Bucks-Lakers N.B.A. finals matchup (it says the odds on Bucks-Clippers would not be far off those). Game 1 would be Bucks at home by 4, for example. In Game 2, the Bucks would be favored by only 3½.Why the weird half-point difference? “The adjustment takes into account the expected ‘bounce-back effort’ from the Lakers, should they lose the first game of the series,” said Adam Burns, odds manager at SportsBetting, ag. “Bettors have traditionally backed the losing team of Game 1 in the second game.” In the hypothetical games in Los Angeles, the Lakers are favorites by 1 to 1½ points.Or you could turn all the cancellations into a wagering opportunity. When will the first N.B.A. game be played, before or after July 1? After is the favorite, at 3-5, with before at 5-4. That’s about a 60-40 edge in favor of no games until July at least.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Australia, the last major holdout, plugging away with its major team sports in front of empty stadiums, has finally given up, shutting down soccer, rugby and even Australian rules football.The soccer lineup for this week is down basically to Myanmar — congrats to Hantharwady United for its 4-2 victory over Zwekapin United — and our reliable friends in Belarus, who show no signs of stopping. Don’t miss the Minsk derby on Saturday morning.The 2020 Olympics may be in peril of not occurring on time, but the torch relay continues, only there will now be no passing of the torch. Some relay. Sounds like an American 4x100-meter team.And last week we urged you to make those Baku Ramada reservations, since the Azerbaijan Grand Prix on June 7 was to be the start of the Formula One season. That was short-lived. You may want to switch to the Ritz-Carlton, Montreal, as Baku has been canceled, and the season will start June 14 in Canada.