Many Races, Little Time: Cycling Faces a Crowded Calendar
Most of cycling's races have been crammed into the new schedule, and many races overlap. Plus a possible heavyweight bout in a Roman amphitheater and Formiga’s next move.By Victor MatherLike most of the sports world, cycling shut down in mid-March. Now the international federation has announced plans for the resumption of the season in August. And the calendar is packed, to say the least.A few events were canceled outright, including the Tour of Switzerland. But most of the races originally planned for March through July have been crammed into the new schedule, somehow, someway.Many multiday races overlap, most notably two of the Grand Tours, in Spain and Italy. The Giro d’Italia will start on Oct. 3 but not end until Oct. 25. The Vuelta d’Espana will start on Oct. 20, before the Giro ends. As recently as 2008, Alberto Contador won both races in the same year. That will be impossible in 2020.The Tour de France, which is to be held in September instead of June and July, usually has little major competition for attention. But this year it will be held simultaneously with an important weeklong Italian race, the Tirreno-Adriatico, which has been won in recent years by Tour champions Contador, Vincenzo Nibali and Cadel Evans.Even some lesser known events from the spring, like the Three Days of Bruges–De Panne, have been squeezed into the schedule in the fall.The women’s tour, which has far fewer events, has also pushed them back to August through November. And it is even adding an event, a first-ever women’s edition of Paris-Roubaix, the prestigious race in France in April in which riders race over grueling cobblestones.The crowded men’s lineup means that cyclists will have to pick and choose which events to ride in. As a result, the fields of many events will be weaker than usual. Paris-Roubaix, for example, has been moved to Oct. 25, and will lose any riders racing in either the Giro or Vuelta.There’s a risk of fan fatigue, too, as cycling enthusiasts accustomed to a big race every week or two may feel overwhelmed by the deluge of events, some of them on the same day.It’s an issue many individual sports may soon face when things resume — whether to get in as many events as possible, potentially diluting their quality and overwhelming fans, or be more selective and potentially lose revenue.Heavyweight champ Anthony Joshua was supposed to defend his belt against Kubrat Pulev of Bulgaria in London on June 20. But the coronavirus caused the bout to be postponed. (The two men had also been supposed to meet in 2017, but the fight was called off because of an injury to Pulev.)The fighters are now eager to finally square off in August or September, but social distancing regulations in Britain could make that difficult. So their managers are looking elsewhere, and thinking creatively.One possibility for a solution to this most modern of problems is a return to the past. The year A.D. 96 to be precise.The fight may be held in the Pula Arena, a Roman amphitheater in Croatia, said Pulev’s manager, Ivaylo Gotsev.The arena has been the host of numerous big events over the last couple of millenniums, notably gladiator fights and wild animal combat. After restoration in the 1930s, it has been mostly used for concerts.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Joshua brings a record of 23-1 into the bout. (He is 0-0 in gladiatorial combat.)Formiga, the venerable Brazilian midfielder, is 42, so you might expect her career to be winding down. But on Thursday, she signed a contract extension through 2021 with her club team, Paris-St. Germain. In a way, the virus is the reason.Formiga had been holding off retirement in part because she wants to play in one more Olympics. She has played in every Games since women’s soccer was added to the menu in 1996, winning two silver medals, as well as in the last seven women’s World Cups, a record.She has spoken of wanting to play in a seventh Olympics, and with the Games pushed to 2021, now her club career will extend another year as well.“After a game, my recovery time is longer,” she said last year. “Before it was like this” — she snapped her fingers — “and now it can take 40 to 70 hours” to recover.