In Britain, Summer Sports Cancellations Just Hit Different
The losses of Wimbledon and the British Open, hallmarks of summer in Britain, feel merely hypothetical, since soccer usually sets the rhythm of everyday life.By Rory SmithThe British summer is a confounding, elusive thing. Some years, it is long and warm and hazy, with endless months of blue skies and hosepipe bans, spent drinking in beer gardens and making sincere promises that, next year, we won’t need to bother going abroad.Some years, it is as though it does not come at all. It is spring one day, fall the next, the only apparent difference a distinct change in the nature of the rain. Often, summer seems to be condensed into a single week in May, and perhaps, with luck, a brief, tantalizing reprise on the first weekend of August.But the British feeling of summer — the point at which people start wearing shorts, regardless of the actual weather, and stockpiling Pimms, regardless of the taste — is different. It runs on a fixed schedule: High summer arrives late in June and runs, uninterrupted, through to August.Its rhythm, its introduction, crescendo and conclusion, are set not by the temperature: That is far too unreliable. Instead, cultural landmarks denote the shift in seasons. The British summer, most years, is bookended by two festivals: Glastonbury, in June, and Edinburgh, in August. But it is defined, ultimately, by sport.The dates for this year’s British summer, then, could be known a year ago: Wimbledon was due to start the day after Glastonbury, on June 29. It would conclude on July 12, the same day as the British Open, Europe’s only men’s golf major, was scheduled to get underway. A week later, the final round at Royal St. George’s, in Kent, would have coincided with the British installment of Formula One’s world championship, at Silverstone, in Northamptonshire.Over the last few weeks, all but one have fallen by the wayside. Glastonbury was canceled on March 18. Wimbledon — and the Edinburgh festival — went on April 1. The Open was struck from the schedule on April 6.For now, the British Grand Prix remains in place, but a decision on its fate is due at the end of the month. Formula One has already canceled nine races this season. Much of the cricket season, that other great fixture of summer, may go the same way: The Hundred, a much-derided new format, is likely to be postponed; the County Championship, a stalwart since 1890, could yet be canceled.Each announcement, in an ordinary news cycle, would have generated substantial shock. As the organizers of both Wimbledon and the Open mentioned in their respective statements, only World War II has ever stopped both from being played. In this news cycle, though, their cancellations passed with little more than a shrug from the populace here.That is, of course, in part because minds are on the much more pressing concern of the soaring death tolls of the coronavirus pandemic; in part it is because, locked down and scared, few would have assumed those landmarks of summer were going to happen anyway. The shock of each new day, same as the old day, pounds the senses so that it seems even to distort time. Every day lasts a week, more. The day after Wimbledon had been canceled, the news felt like ancient history.But the lack of sentiment is rooted, too, in the nature of stand-alone sporting events. Golf, tennis and motor sport all have significant, devoted followings for whom these are the highlights of the year, and to much of the public they are as much cultural occasions — like Glastonbury, like Edinburgh — as sporting ones. For most, those events are not consumed live, but remotely, from the comfort of a living room and are only engaged with in the moment.The disappearance of those summer milestones contrasted with the disruption to soccer is instructive as to the role they play in the British national consciousness. For many, soccer is part of the background noise of daily life. It is not something to savor, to look forward to. It is, in normal times, just there.In Britain, soccer sets the rhythm not of one season but of the week: Tuesday and Wednesday evenings in spring are Champions League nights; there is a twinge of excitement when the clock hits three on a Saturday, even if your team is not playing; Monday actually starts at 6:30 p.m. on a Sunday, when the final game of the weekend draws to a close.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Soccer is sport as soap opera and friend, as identity and addiction, and its absence is tangible: Something that was there is not here. Not just in terms of numbers — for 40 weeks of the year, millions reliably turn up in person to watch soccer of varying quality — but in terms of engagement. The absence of Wimbledon and the Open is, for now, hypothetical.The season was suspended, indefinitely, on March 13; the leagues and clubs remain determined to finish it, at some point, but when that will be remains entirely unclear. It is different, of course, to be deprived of something that was underway and to lose something that was yet to start, but our interaction with soccer is different to our interaction with, say, Wimbledon.