Cody Latimer of Washington Redskins Faces Assault and Weapons Charges
By Derrick Bryson TaylorCody Latimer, the Washington Redskins wide receiver formerly of the New York Giants, was arrested early on Saturday in Colorado on assault and weapons charges, local officials said.Sheriff’s deputies responded to a call around 12:11 a.m. of arguing and gunfire inside a unit at the Zenith Meridian Apartments, the Douglas County Sheriff’s Office said in a statement.Deputies detained three people; one person had minor injuries unrelated to the gunfire, the statement said. No other injuries were reported.It was not immediately clear what happened inside the apartment, which is in Douglas County, about 17 miles southeast of Denver, before the authorities arrived. The sheriff’s office said it had no additional information as of Saturday afternoon.Mr. Latimer was taken into custody and transported to the Douglas County Detention Facility, where he was booked on charges of second-degree assault, menacing, illegal discharge of a firearm, prohibited use of a weapon and reckless endangerment.He was released on a $25,000 bond and is scheduled to appear in court on Monday, according to Deputy Cocha Heyden, a public information officer for the sheriff’s office.The Redskins did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Saturday. However, the team told NFL.com that it was “aware” of the situation and had informed the league office.“We will continue to gather more information and have no further comment at this time,” the team said.It was unclear if Mr. Latimer had a lawyer.It has been a rocky week for the N.F.L., as arrest warrants were issued on Thursday for Giants cornerback Deandre Baker and Seattle Seahawks cornerback Quinton Dunbar, who were both accused of armed robbery at a cookout they attended near Miami the night before.Washington signed Mr. Latimer in March. He had spent the previous two seasons with the Giants, where he had 35 catches for 490 yards and three touchdowns in 21 games.He also returned 24 kicks for the Giants last season, averaging just less than 24 yards per attempt.He entered the N.F.L. in 2014 after being selected in the second round of the draft by the Denver Broncos and won the 2016 Super Bowl with the team.During his final college season at Indiana University, Mr. Latimer had over 1,000 yards receiving with nine touchdowns and was named second-team all-Big Ten.