Aqueduct Suspends Races After Worker Tests Positive for Coronavirus
By Joe DrapeThe New York Racing Association suspended horse racing at Aqueduct Racetrack this weekend after a worker who cared for the animals tested positive for the coronavirus on Thursday morning.The association had hoped to conduct racing this weekend with no fans, as it did last weekend. The backstretch worker, who lives at Belmont Park, a track about 9 miles from Aqueduct, had been quarantined since Friday after showing symptoms of the virus. His roommate was quarantined as well, according to the association, which operates both tracks.“This individual and his roommate have been in isolation since prior to racing last Friday and as such did not travel to Aqueduct for live racing,” Dave O’Rourke, the association’s chief executive, said in a statement. “We are working with the county and state departments of health to ensure proper quarantine and sterilization practices will continue to be followed moving forward.”The association said it would decide later when to resume racing at Aqueduct. Belmont Park, where the worker lives, is out of season and not running races.While the virus has transformed much of daily life in the United States, horse racing has continued without fans in the stands, the action primarily geared toward bettors placing wagers while isolated at home. Several major thoroughbred tracks, such as Santa Anita Park in California and Oaklawn Racing Casino Resort in Arkansas, plan to run full slates with four to 10 horses per race on Saturday and Sunday.NBC Sports — which has been seeking live events to broadcast — plans to simulcast “Trackside Live,” the signature program of the horse racing network TVG, which jumps around to live races throughout the sport. On Saturday, the Louisiana Derby will be run at the fairgrounds in New Orleans.The coronavirus is just the latest source of upheaval for a sport that has been rife with problems, including an alarming number of horses who sustain fatal injuries and a sweeping federal doping investigation. Still, the sport remains a multibillion-dollar industry and racetrack operators have tried to keep their doors open.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Last weekend, Aqueduct took in more than $17 million in wagers. New York’s thoroughbred tracks saw $2.1 billion in wagers in 2019.