Argentina and France Scrap Soccer Seasons
But the South Korean F.A. Cup is back on, and some outdoor recreational activities will again be allowed in Washington State.By Victor MatherSports get postponed, sports get canceled, and, yes, sometimes, someday, somewhere, somehow, sports can resume.France scrapped its soccer season on Tuesday, in an announcement by the prime minister, Édouard Philippe. Paris St.-Germain was 12 points up in Ligue 1 with 11 games to play when the season was halted in March. The plan is to begin a new season in September. Indeed, Philippe said no major team sporting events of any kind, or events with crowds of more than 5,000, would take place in France until September.“It will be possible, on sunny days, to practice an individual sporting activity outdoors, respecting the rules of social distancing,” Philippe said. “It will not be possible to practice sport indoors, nor team or contact sports.”In Argentina, the soccer season was also called off. Conveniently for the top league, when play was halted each team had played every other team once, making for a clean stopping point. A second round in which teams would have each played 11 games has been scrapped.Boca Juniors won the title by a point over its fierce Buenos Aires rival, River Plate, whose fans can’t be delighted about the cancellation of those remaining 11 games.But the F.A. Cup is back on! Well, perhaps not the one that most sports fans around the world follow — the version in England — but the South Korean F.A. Cup, originally set to start in March. It will now begin on May 9, and for at least the early rounds, games will have no fans.On the one hand, it seemed as if the National Rugby League in Australia was way ahead of the curve in getting back to business. On the other hand, some of its players can’t seem to stay out of trouble.It looks as if the league will return on May 28 and play through to a final on Oct. 25. Players and staff members will face strict travel rules and be allowed to leave home only for training and a few essential activities.But social distancing is not coming naturally to every rugby player. Three were recently pictured camping with about a dozen people, drawing fines from the police and the league.Two of the players, Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr, were also arrested on firearms charges. Addo-Carr had posted a video of himself shooting a gun at the camp-out and, to top it all off, could be seen riding a dirt bike without a helmet. The players have apologized.Some outdoor recreational activities will be allowed once again in Washington State starting on May 5. Residents may hunt and fish, and golf courses and state parks will reopen.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The return of recreational activities is part of a gradual reopening plan. The stay-at-home order in Washington is set to expire May 4, and an extension has not been announced. People will still be required to maintain social distancing.“Outdoor recreation is one of the best things we can do to promote physical, mental and emotional well-being for Washingtonians during a time of great stress and isolation,” Gov. Jay Inslee said in a statement. “And springtime in our state is Washington at its best, and people want to be out enjoying outdoor activities in a safe and responsible way.”