Zlatan Ibrahimovic Returns to Milan; Fans Return to Taiwan Baseball
No, Ibrahimovic is not returning to play soccer in Sweden, his home country. Plus: A top soccer team in China folds, and fans return (carefully) to the baseball stands in Taiwan.By Victor MatherSwedish soccer fans had been hoping that the strange circumstances of the coronavirus pandemic would have a surprising side effect: the return of striker Zlatan Ibrahimovic to his home country.But now it seems those hopes have been dashed, as Ibrahimovic, 38, is set to return to Italy for a two-week quarantine period before rejoining A.C. Milan, which is starting individual training again. (Cristiano Ronaldo is already in quarantine for a return to Juventus.)Ibrahimovic started his career at Malmo in Sweden before moving on to some of the top teams around the world, including Ajax, Juventus, Inter, Barcelona, Paris St.-Germain, Manchester United and the Los Angeles Galaxy. He played eight games for his latest team, Milan, before Serie A shut down.He then returned to Sweden and trained with a team he co-owns, Hammarby. That prompted headlines about the return of the prodigal son. Alas, it seems Ibrahimovic is not ready to leave Italian football yet.But some remarks by Jesper Jansson, the director of football of Hammarby, caused the speculation engine to rev up again. Asked if Ibrahimovic might return to Sweden at the end of the Italian season (whenever that may be), he told the Swedish newspaper Expressen: “I think so. But only Zlatan himself knows. He hasn’t said anything like that, and it’s not that I need to ask him and tell him that we want him here. But I’ve learned that he doesn’t say anything until he’s 100 percent sure.”While that might seem pretty vague, it was enough to get Swedish fans and the news media fired up again for Ibrahimovic to start adding to his Swedish league goal total for the first time since 2001.Many teams and leagues around the world have talked of their financial hardship during the pandemic. But few top teams have actually shut up shop.One of the biggest to do so thus far may be the soccer team Tianjin of the Chinese Super League, which said on Monday that it would pull out of the league in preparation of folding.Tianjin had spent three years in the top division, finishing in a high of third place in 2017 and 14th last season.The C.S.L. had been set to start in February, but did not because of the virus. It now hopes to start in late June, perhaps with an abbreviated schedule.When big sports teams anywhere in the world cry poor, there is sometimes the suspicion that they are merely angling for a government handout or tax relief. Once they actually start to close their doors, the signs get a lot grimmer.The French Open was postponed. P.S.G. has stopped playing. The Tour de France won’t roll down the Champs-Élysées in July. But top-level sports returned to Paris on Monday as horse racing resumed at Longchamp in the Bois de Boulogne.The horses broke from the gate despite a governmental order banning sports in France until Sept. 1. The government of President Emmanuel Macron decided to give racing special permission to proceed, without fans.Everyone at the track was required to wear a mask, including the jockeys during the races. Trainers, along with one assistant each, were allowed to attend, but not owners. Many of the track’s buildings were closed, and the sprawling facility had just one entrance open.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The main event was the Prix d’Harcourt, a major race for older horses. Shaman won, and many bettors watching from home were tearing up their tickets after the heavy favorite, the French Derby winner Sottsass, ran fourth.Horse racing has been one of the few sports to press on in some places in the United States, including at major tracks such as Gulfstream in Florida and Oaklawn in Arkansas.Step 1: Play the games. Step 2: Let the fans back in. That is starting to happen in a few places.Taiwan’s baseball league got underway in mid-April, a month late, with empty stadiums. But over the weekend, some fans were allowed back, carefully, for the first time.The crowds were limited to 1,000 fans. Everyone was required to wear a mask, and fans were seated three seats apart, even if they arrived at the game together. There were temperature checks, and no food was served, or allowed to be brought in.With a record of 14-4, the Rakuten Monkeys comfortably lead the four-team league.