L.P.G.A. Shifts Schedule Once Again
Plus the future of the spitball in cricket and a backyard pole vault runway and pit that meets competition standards.By Bill PenningtonThe L.P.G.A. Tour rescheduled its tentative events to July from June on Wednesday because of the coronavirus pandemic, and the P.G.A. of America announced that the Women’s P.G.A. Championship, a major, was moving to October from June. Five other L.P.G.A. events were canceled.The first event of a resumed L.P.G.A. Tour schedule, the Dow Great Lakes Bay Invitational, is set for July 15-18 in Midland, Mich. The next two events would be in Sylvania, Ohio, and Galloway, N.J., with a revised tournament schedule that continues into the third week of December, one week after the recently postponed United States Women’s Open in Houston Dec. 10-13.There have now been nine L.P.G.A. tournaments canceled, although the shortened L.P.G.A tournament schedule will mean an increase in prize money for several events, with the average purse growing to $2.7 million per competition.Tour officials concede the schedule could be altered again in succeeding weeks.“While July seems like a long way away, we are certainly aware that restarting our season in Michigan, Ohio and New Jersey will require a continued improvement in the situation in each of those states,” Mike Whan, the L.P.G.A. Commissioner, said in a statement. “We have built a schedule that we think is as safe as possible given what we know about travel bans, testing availability, and delivering events that our sponsors and our athletes will be excited to attend.”In a conference call with reporters Wednesday afternoon, Whan said that when tournaments resumed he expected tour players and caddies to be tested for the coronavirus regularly. Whan added that such testing, “could be available in large supply by the end of May.”The Women’s P.G.A. Championship, originally scheduled for June 25-28 at the Aronimink Golf Club outside Philadelphia, has been postponed until Oct. 8-11 at the same site.Suzy Whaley, the P.G.A. of America president, called the four-month postponement, “a prudent choice.”If you’re more of a baseball fan, you might be surprised to learn that in cricket, the spitball is absolutely legal. But that may now change in the wake of the coronavirus.The cricket authorities are considering barring players from spitting on the ball, Cricinfo reported, given the potential health concerns of multiple players handling a ball that others have expectorated on.Rather than ban tampering with the ball entirely, the new rules would allow players to use artificial substances instead of spit, like shoe polish or wax. The change is significant: Using foreign substances on the ball has long been forbidden in the game.At the start of cricket games, the new ball is clean and shiny and tends to benefit bowlers, who can get it to move as it approaches the batters. But as the game progresses and the ball becomes scuffed up, it becomes harder to do so, and batters can get the edge.So bowlers do what they can to keep the ball nice and shiny: rub it on their sweaters, moisten it with sweat, and, yes, spit on it.Without allowing some way for bowlers to keep the ball shiny, batters may have too much of an advantage. “Bowlers rely on any sort of sideways movement in the air,” the Australian bowler Josh Hazlewood told Cricinfo. “It would be quite easy to bat after that initial shine has gone.” VICTOR MATHERSandi Morris, an Olympic silver medalist, needed a way to practice pole vaulting during the coronavirus outbreak. So she and her father built their own runway and pit.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Morris, who trains in Arkansas, returned home to Greenville, S.C., to be with her family. She and her father began building the pit in early April on a field near their neighborhood’s tennis courts. They completed it last week, and Morris is now able to train on it. The runway and pit, which she calls the Pink Panther, meets competition standards.