Baseball Hall of Fame Inductions Will Wait Till Next Year
The board of directors for the Hall decided on Wednesday that the threat of the coronavirus would make it impossible to hold the ceremony as planned in late July.By Tyler KepnerRollie Fingers was 45 years old when he was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1992. He has returned every summer since, and he wanted to be there this July when Ted Simmons, his old catcher, was scheduled to be enshrined.But Fingers is 73 now, and on Monday he said he could not imagine that happening as the country grappled with the coronavirus pandemic.“You’ve got guys my age there — 73, 74, 75, up to 80 or 85,” Fingers said. “Do you want to take that chance on maybe catching it? You’re writing your own ticket then.”On Tuesday, the Hall of Fame’s board made it official: There will be no induction ceremony this summer in Cooperstown, N.Y. Derek Jeter, Larry Walker, Simmons and Marvin Miller, the union leader who died in 2012, will have their day in July 2021, combined with the next class of electees.“Being inducted into the Hall of Fame will be an incredible honor,” Jeter said in a statement, “but the health and safety of everyone involved are paramount.”Walker added: “It is most important to do the right thing for everybody involved, and that means not putting any participants in jeopardy, whether Hall of Famers or visitors. I realize how serious this situation has become and how many lives have been lost.”The Hall of Fame was expecting a crowd that would have exceeded the record 80,000 or so who showed up for the induction of Cal Ripken Jr. and Tony Gwynn in 2007. Now, the ceremony has become the latest slice of baseball Americana to disappear from the summer calendar. Both the College World Series in Omaha and the Cape Cod League in Massachusetts had already been canceled, and Cooperstown Dreams Park — where thousands of players flock for youth summer tournaments — had closed for the 2020 season.The Hall, which has been shuttered since March 15, said in a news release that its board of directors had voted unanimously to move the induction festivities to July 23-26 of next year. The Hall of Famer Joe Morgan, the vice chairman of the board, cited “so many unknowns facing the world” as the main reason for the decision.The ceremony is essentially an all-or-nothing event. It is free to attend — just pull up a lawn chair — but laborious to plan, with one hotel, the stately Otesaga, serving the Hall of Famers and their families and many local residents renting their homes to out-of-towners. The workarounds of the day, like Zoom conference calls or social distancing, did not apply.Tim Mead, the Hall of Fame’s president, said in a phone interview on Monday that his staff members had devised — and eliminated — several options.“We would not have a made-for-television or a virtual program,” Mead said. “That induction ceremony is a special moment for the baseball community across the country and beyond.”The stage might not be crowded in 2021, even with two classes inducted together. The best newcomers on the next writers’ ballot, statistically, will be Mark Buehrle, Tim Hudson and Torii Hunter, who seem highly unlikely to be elected on their first try, if at all. Only one holdover, Curt Schilling, came close last year.Schilling got 70 percent of the vote, with 75 percent needed for election. The candidacies of Roger Clemens (61 percent) and Barry Bonds (60.7 percent), both complicated by ties to performance-enhancing drugs, have stalled.Mead said that the Hall of Fame felt a responsibility to the inductees, another factor Morgan cited in his statement. Making a speech on a Cooperstown stage — with thousands of fans in front of you and dozens of legends behind you — is the moment a player crosses an imaginary threshold into baseball immortality.“That’s the biggest day of your life when it comes to baseball,” said Fingers, who elevated the closer position and the handlebar mustache as an Oakland Athletic in the 1970s. “You want that big day, you want all your fans to be there, your whole family. It’s not just getting into the Hall, it’s a whole lot of other things. Everybody wants that.”Fingers was scheduled to join Wade Boggs, Goose Gossage, Fergie Jenkins, Tim Raines, Ozzie Smith and recent retirees from each team for an annual exhibition game in Cooperstown on May 23. That event was canceled in March, and the Hall has been staging virtual events online, including a weekly podcast with Chipper Jones and the broadcaster Jon Sciambi on Instagram Live.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Meanwhile, Hall of Fame officials are considering the health protocols of a return to business. Is it still sufficiently sanitary for visitors to touch the plaques, to sit beside one another in the Bullpen Theatre, to peruse the bookstore and gift shop? And without the usual summer visitors, what will become of the shops and restaurants on Main Street, with its one stoplight and millions of memories for sale?“The induction weekend is one thing, but the summer business that we’re losing is the majority of it,” said Adam Yastrzemski, who runs a popular memorabilia store on a corner near the Hall. “We’ll just do the best we can.”So will the hallowed museum down the block, which has not combined classes into one ceremony since 1949. But this is a year like no other, and cramming tens of thousands of people onto a field in upstate New York was simply implausible.“If there’s 70,000 people there, you know someone is going to have it, even if they don’t know they have it,” Fingers said. “They may infect somebody, and then it’s a domino effect. It’s the same thing with baseball itself. If they’re playing with fans in the stands, you don’t know what can possibly happen.”