Feeling Robbed, the Dodgers Are ‘Working Angry’
They have won seven N.L. West titles in a row, but no World Series titles in that time, and now must prepare for a new season believing that the Astros cheated them out of one in 2017.By Tyler KepnerGLENDALE, Ariz. — Alex Wood was the last pitcher for the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 2017 World Series, mopping up for two clean innings as the Houston Astros won the title in Game 7. In the next World Series, Wood was the only Dodgers pitcher to beat the Boston Red Sox, working a scoreless top of the 18th inning in Game 3 before Max Muncy won it with a homer.Then Wood spent a year with the Cincinnati Reds, mostly on the injured list with back trouble. He returned to the Dodgers as a free agent in January, the same week Major League Baseball released its investigative report on the Astros’ electronic sign-stealing scheme in 2017. Wood feels there is a renewed sense of purpose with the Dodgers.“It feels like guys are working angry,” Wood said on Saturday, in the Dodgers’ clubhouse at Camelback Ranch. “There’s one clear-cut focus, and that’s what do we have to do to win today and how are we going to get to the World Series and win? That’s the overriding sentiment, at least to me. Leaving for a year and coming back, you notice a lot more things.”The Dodgers have never lacked motivation. They have won seven National League West titles in a row, with robust payrolls and a steady infusion of high-impact prospects. All that is missing over that time is a championship, and they will always believe the Astros robbed them of one in 2017.“I think it’s a pretty safe assumption that if they weren’t cheating, we would have won the World Series,” Wood said. “It’s hard to think like that, but I don’t think that would be an unpopular opinion throughout baseball. We were so good in ’17. I mean, we were so freaking good.”The Astros were 8-1 at home in the 2017 postseason, and while they have disputed the effectiveness of their sign-stealing scheme that October, M.L.B. found that it was still in use. The Astros’ only home loss was in Game 4 of the World Series, when Wood no-hit them until George Springer homered with two outs in the sixth.It was an emotional night for Wood; it was his wife’s birthday and the anniversary of an accident that paralyzed his best friend and University of Georgia teammate, Chance Veazey. Wood still managed to execute a careful game plan that accounted for rumors of the Astros’ sign-stealing. He did not know the scope of their effort, but he took the threat seriously.“We switched it up a lot,” Wood said, referring to the catcher’s signals. “We started the first couple of innings using multiples with no one on, changing our signs every inning, all that good stuff. We definitely took some extra precautions, for sure, and I think my tempo certainly helped, too. I was working really fast, and that probably helped deter some of their sign-stealing stuff.”Wood has been encouraged, he said, by the way fellow players — especially stars like Aaron Judge and Mike Trout, who rarely cause a stir — have spoken out against the Astros. It is important, Wood said, to put their victory in context.“It’s just having the world know the magnitude of what they did and what that means to baseball,” Wood said, “so they’re remembered in the way that they should be remembered — not as World Series champions but as cheaters, which is what they were.”As a team, the Dodgers have moved on by acquiring two stars who helped beat them in 2018: right fielder Mookie Betts and starter David Price, who arrived from Boston last month in a trade for three young players.Price, Wood and Julio Urias should help offset the loss of starters Hyun-Jin Ryu, Rich Hill and Kenta Maeda. Betts impressed his new teammates by addressing them on the second day of full-squad workouts, emphasizing accountability and the urgency of daily preparation for a World Series run, as the Red Sox did.“Different organizations operate differently, so it was just taking what I learned there and maybe helping do it here, helping us get over the hump,” Betts said. “They’ve been to the playoffs however many years and haven’t come out on top just yet. So obviously, from my viewpoint, there’s a little something off. I’m not going to sit here and say that I’m right, but I wouldn’t be myself if I didn’t speak from the heart.”Price has reached the playoffs in his debut season with each of his four prior teams — Tampa Bay, Detroit, Toronto and Boston. His career highlight came at his new home park, with a World Series-clinching victory on short rest in Game 5 at Dodger Stadium in 2018. He does not wear his ring to the clubhouse.“It’s not something I’m going to reminisce or even talk about with these guys because that was a tough time for my new teammates,” Price said. “I want to recreate those memories as a Dodger. I want to get back to that point and help these guys reach the goal they’ve been trying to reach.”Price is signed through 2022 (with the Red Sox paying half of his $32 million annual salary), but Betts will be a free agent after this season. His pedigree and early impression have historical echoes of 1988, the Dodgers’ last championship season, when Kirk Gibson joined the team. Gibson had won a title elsewhere, but burned for another and demanded intensity. Betts does, too.“He’s showing leadership, how much he cares about winning,” closer Kenley Jansen said. “Listen, they have a taste of it, they beat us in ’18, and they know. I hear a lot of people say that when they win one championship, they want to win more. That’s what we want to play for.”Jansen threw the Dodgers’ last pitch in Houston in 2017, in the 10th inning of Game 5 of the World Series. Alex Bregman lined it to left field for a single, capping a 13-12 thriller and sending the series back to Los Angeles, where the Dodgers won Game 6 to force the dreary finale.Jansen is done looking back — “I’m just over that,” he said — and most of the Dodgers are understandably weary of the topic. Pitcher Ross Stripling worked out all winter in Houston, mostly before M.L.B. released its report, and grew tired of fans who tried to play down the impact of sign-stealing.“I was like: ‘Dude, you just don’t get it. I’m not going to get into this with you,’” Stripling said. “I had that conversation a lot. But then once the sanctions came out, I could kind of be like: ‘It speaks for itself.’”So does the Dodgers’ roster. The 2019 team lost in a five-game division series to the Washington Nationals, but set a franchise record with 106 victories while leading the majors in earned run average (3.37) and the N.L. in runs scored (5.47 per game).In Betts, the Dodgers now have a former American League most valuable player to go with Cody Bellinger, the reigning N.L. winner. In Price, they have a former A.L. Cy Young Award winner to pair with Clayton Kershaw, who has won three in the N.L., plus an M.V.P. award.As the Astros endure the shame of a tainted title, the Dodgers have loaded up with star power for another try.