The N.C.A.A. Says It’s Working to Change. Next Year, at the Soonest.
By Alan Blinder and Billy WitzANAHEIM, Calif. — The delegates had long been lining the back of a meeting room by the time John J. DeGioia, the president of Georgetown University, harked back to last year’s N.C.A.A. convention. Back then, the matter of whether college athletes should be allowed to profit from their fame was on the periphery for the leaders of college sports.Not anymore.The N.C.A.A. convention that convened this week is confronting some of the greatest turmoil in the organization’s 113-year history, with elected officials in Washington and more than two dozen states considering whether to try to harness the power of government to allow college athletes to make money from their names, images and likenesses.The coast-to-coast machinations have left a multibillion-dollar industry, after first being hammered into a defensive crouch, scrambling to persuade politicians and the public of the wholesomeness of college sports. Over a few days in Anaheim, Calif., this week, college officials have talked of fixes in session after session, in one private pull-aside after another — but all with the knowledge that even concrete proposals for a resolution are most likely months away.“Do I believe college sports is going to blow up? No, I don’t,” Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A. president, said Thursday evening. “But I think the way everybody responds to this and the way the N.C.A.A. responds to these particular issues is really, really important. The existential crisis to me is: Can we respond in a way that makes sense for our students and supports the college sports model?”Interviews this week with college sports leaders suggested a steady consensus around the notion that the N.C.A.A. must loosen its rules, something it signaled in October that it would eventually do. Yet there was also a sporadic sense that it is easier to muse about change than to make it happen.“Everyone’s still talking; nothing’s been thrown out,” said Gene Smith, the athletic director at Ohio State and the co-chairman of the N.C.A.A. group that has been studying the name, image and likeness issue since the spring. He added: “So right now, everything’s on the table.”Indeed, the N.C.A.A. emerged from this week’s convention with ideas for changes percolating throughout its complex organizational chart. The group headed by Smith and the Big East commissioner Val Ackerman, for instance, is charged with developing proposals that will be scrutinized by the board of governors, a sprawling council of college administrators and business, political and athletic leaders that could ask Congress to help codify the ideas into law.The group that Ackerman and Smith leads did not even exist a year ago, when the issue of how and whether players should be able to profit from their play largely remained in the background, as it had for more than a decade.Then in September, California approved a measure designed to guarantee students the right to reach endorsement deals and hire agents once it takes effect in 2023. The legislation, which the N.C.A.A. opposed and might still challenge in court, has since emerged as a bipartisan template in other statehouses.The law also instigated a far louder reckoning for the N.C.A.A. and its longstanding rules restricting players’ financial opportunities.N.C.A.A. officials and supporters insist that the organization is willing to adjust its system to a point. M. Grace Calhoun, the Pennsylvania athletic director who leads the Division I Council, which oversees the most prominent parts of N.C.A.A. competition, suggested that the organization could ease obstacles for, say, basketball players to give lessons.But Calhoun also made plain that the N.C.A.A. would only be rewriting so many rules.“We’re dealing with student-athletes, and when you look at the principles we’ve established, we won’t cross that line from them being students to turning into employees,” she said.Although Calhoun said officials were working “very aggressively” to come up with proposals, the N.C.A.A.’s rule-making structure relies on a labyrinth of committees and forums. The system seeks the views of about 1,100 member institutions, which could deepen frustrations and skepticism because it all but precludes a speedy resolution.Still, the proposals will begin to take shape between now and April, when the first drafts are expected to emerge. Three N.C.A.A. subcommittees, which are examining athlete work opportunities, individual licensing and group licensing, will soon offer ideas, and feedback will also come from conferences, Olympic sports organizations and students.Group licensing — a team’s presence in a video game, for example, a fan-favorite issue online — may prove the most thorny, Calhoun said, because such an arrangement can veer toward students being considered employees.N.C.A.A. members probably will not sign off on any changes until January 2021, and even those would probably not apply until later in the year. Even a January 2021 approval would come months after some state legislators hope their California-style proposals will take effect, though legal experts have said that the N.C.A.A. or its members would probably be able to persuade courts to block those measures, at least temporarily.For now, the N.C.A.A. has lurched into a campaign — on Capitol Hill, before a think tank, at the Justice Department and in news media interviews — to stave off simmering public discontent and more drastic government interventions. It is, however, largely leaving the battles in the states to colleges and conferences.“What we need to do is take that energy that’s produced and make sure that sound decisions are made and that aren’t just reactive to any one state or any one legislator,” Emmert said in an interview last week, when he warned that the “unintended consequences of a patchwork system” could undermine a model that the N.C.A.A. argues works fine for most of its 500,000 student-athletes.A cure could come from Congress. The university officials who are among the most influential in college athletics said this week that they increasingly believed that federal lawmakers would have to set guidelines, or at least offer the N.C.A.A. some legal cover for modified rules.“It’s important for the working group to look for solutions, but most of those solutions are going to raise issues that will lead to another round of lawsuits without some protection by Congress,” Jere Morehead, Georgia’s president, said in the corridor of a Disneyland-area hotel where N.C.A.A. policymakers convened.“We can’t have California having one piece of legislation and then Florida, Georgia and New York having different ones,” he added. “We’ve got to have a federal solution and have the N.C.A.A. work with them.”Far less clear is whether a Washington mired in acrimony and gearing up for a presidential election will ultimately prove willing to act. Still, some N.C.A.A. officials pointed to President Trump’s trade deal last month with Canada and Mexico, which was overwhelmingly approved by the House of Representatives — one day after the same body had voted to impeach him — as proof that a consensus can always be found.“The one thing for sure about politics is if you think you can predict anything you’re a fool,” said Franklin D. Gilliam Jr., the chancellor at North Carolina-Greensboro, who has a doctorate in political science. “This looks like it isn’t going to be on the front burner at all, but it can change in a heartbeat and all of a sudden you could get on the front burner so you have to be prepared.”Even if congressional support coalesces around a proposal, it is also unclear whether the outcome would satisfy the N.C.A.A. or its critics, who are backed up by polls that show consistently wide support for protections like those enshrined in California.“The N.C.A.A. is hoping that Congress will wipe away what the states are pursuing at this point,” Ramogi Huma, the executive director of the National College Players Association, an athletes-advocacy group, said this month. “Congress can either expand these rights and freedoms nationwide, or they can eliminate them.”