U.S. Olympic Committee Urges Postponing Summer Games in Tokyo
By Tariq Panja and Motoko RichThe United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee is urging that the Summer Olympics in Tokyo be postponed because of the coronavirus pandemic, adding its large and influential voice to a growing chorus of athletes and sports federations objecting to having the Games go on as scheduled in late July and early August.The International Olympic Committee said Sunday it would make a decision on postponing or otherwise altering the Games within four weeks.But that timeline has been met with skepticism and derision, with Canada’s Olympic committee saying it would not send its athletes this summer and the Australia committee telling its athletes to plan for an Olympics in 2021. Surveys of athletes are showing that most favor a postponement, because it has become increasingly difficult to train as countries impose broad restrictions on movement and shut down gyms and other facilities.The United States committee, representing the largest delegation of athletes at the Games, said in a statement Monday night from its chair, Susanne Lyons, and its chief executive, Sarah Hirshland, that it had made the decision after reviewing a survey that yielded responses from 1,780 American athletes.“Our most important conclusion from this broad athlete response is that even if the current significant health concerns could be alleviated by late summer, the enormous disruptions to the training environment, doping controls and qualification process can’t be overcome in a satisfactory manner,’’ the statement said. “To that end, it’s more clear than ever that the path toward postponement is the most promising, and we encourage the I.O.C. to take all needed steps to ensure the Games can be conducted under safe and fair conditions for all competitors.”With the United States urging a postponement, pressure is likely to increase on the I.O.C. to act soon. Already, athletes, medical experts and others involved in the sporting world are pressing for a quicker end to the uncertainty.For medical experts and governments throughout the world, a firm decision to postpone would allow them to focus on the more immediate worry — containing the pandemic — rather than the Games themselves.For athletes, many of whom have pushed for a postponement, a decision now would take away the pressure of seeking ways to train in a time of social distancing.U.S.A. Gymnastics on Monday also joined the calls for a postponement, following similar stances by national leaders in swimming and track and field. The three sports typically combine to deliver the most medals for the United States each Summer Olympics.Li Li Leung, the chief executive of U.S.A. Gymnastics, said her federation’s decision was based on an anonymous survey of its athletes, in which nearly two-thirds of respondents said they favored delaying the Games for at least three months.“It was really important for us to make sure our athletes’ voices were heard in this,” Leung told reporters during a conference call, adding that the athletes wanted to compete fairly without posing a health risk to others.The I.O.C. and Tokyo need their decision to come in a way that resolves billions of dollars in financial implications.“The bottom line is if the I.O.C. or Tokyo unilaterally decide to cancel or postpone without agreement, they would be in breach of contract and the potential financial repercussions are just enormous,” said John Mehrzad, a British sports lawyer who has represented national and international sports federations and athletes in litigation.“As every day goes by and they don’t make a decision and other countries pull athletes out and the result of that means they can’t go ahead, then both parties will be delighted because it wouldn’t be their fault,” Mehrzad said. “If people try to sue them, they can blame factors out of control for why it isn’t taking place.”A firm decision may come soon enough; Richard W. Pound, an I.O.C. member, said Monday that the Games would clearly not start as scheduled.“On the basis of the information the I.O.C. has, postponement has been decided,” Pound said in an interview with USA Today. “The parameters going forward have not been determined, but the Games are not going to start on July 24, that much I know.”Insisting that no decision has been made, Mark Adams, chief spokesman for the I.O.C., said, “It is the right of every I.O.C. member to interpret the decision of the I.O.C. executive board, which was announced yesterday.”Pound, the longest-serving member of the I.O.C., is not a part of the executive committee that would make the final decision on how to move forward, or a part of the other groups that have coordinated the Tokyo Games or the Olympic response to the coronavirus threat.Olympic leaders in Canada, Australia and Norway said their athletes would not participate even if the Tokyo Games were held as originally scheduled. The governing body for track and field wrote to Thomas Bach, the I.O.C. president, calling for a delay. And in Japan, where politicians and local organizers had resisted any changes to plans that represent years of work and billions of dollars in investments, leaders began to acknowledge the reality of a delay.Yoshiro Mori, the president of the local organizing committee, described a postponement as “inevitable” and said that organizers were not “stupid enough to ignore” the sentiments being expressed by athletes and a growing number of national Olympic committees.Mori said four weeks was a “short time” to get everything needed in order. “It requires a tremendous amount of time and we have to hurry to go through this,” he said.Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, for whom the Tokyo Games are as defining as the Sochi Olympics in 2014 were for President Vladimir Putin of Russia, told parliament on Monday that the country “may have no option but to consider postponing the Games.” Abe said he hoped a decision could be made quickly.The general sentiment in Japan appears to support a delay. A recent poll conducted by the Japanese news agency Kyodo revealed almost 70 percent of people did not expect the Olympics to open as billed on July 24.Bach laid out the I.O.C.’s timeline after an emergency meeting of its executive board on Sunday, saying the group would be guided in its decision by medical experts, specifically the World Health Organization.Lawrence Gostin, an expert on health law who has advised the W.H.O. on other pandemics but is not involved in the decisions surrounding the Olympics, said hosting the Games could be “catastrophic” for the world.“You would literally be bringing people from all over the world to Asia and back — it would be such an amplifying effect that we would come to deeply regret it,” said Gostin, the director of the O’Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law at Georgetown. The institute gives technical and strategic support to the W.H.O. in the United States.Rescheduling an event as gargantuan as the Games — essentially a series of more than 30 world championships — is hardly an easy task. Shifting requires navigating a thicket of financial obligations that have taken years to construct and will be complicated to unwind and then carry forward.For example, the Olympic Village, which was expected to host some 17,000 athletes, coaches and support staff during the Games, is scheduled to be converted into permanent housing afterward. Most of the units have been sold, meaning a postponement would require thousands of contracts and leases to be redone.The I.O.C. also has hundreds of deals with broadcasters and sponsors, many of whom are suffering with the collapse of world markets and are likely to seek a reduction in what they pay to televise the Olympics. While the I.O.C. does have insurance, it’s not yet clear what losses would be covered and what an insurance company might argue would fall outside the policy, which would produce even more litigation.Mehrzad, the sports lawyer, said the I.O.C. and Tokyo needed to be aligned, at the very least, because canceling without a mutual agreement would put the deciders in breach of contract.Updated May 20, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“Commercial partners will have little leverage if the organizers can say the Olympics have been frustrated in their efforts to host the Olympics,” Mehrzad said.NBC Sports, which televises the Games in the United States and is one of the I.O.C.’s biggest partners, said in a statement that it supported the committee’s approach.“We are prepared to stand behind any decision made by the I.O.C., the Japanese government and the world health officials with whom they are working regarding the Tokyo Olympics,” NBC Sports said.Athletes have become increasingly direct in their criticisms of the I.O.C. and Bach.“Does this mean that athletes face up to another FOUR weeks of finding ways to fit in training — whilst potentially putting ourselves, coaches, support staff and loved ones at risk just to find out they were going to be postponed anyway,” the British sprinter Dina Asher-Smith said on Twitter.Max Hartung, a German fencer who was in isolation with his girlfriend at home, recently said publicly that he would not participate in the Games even if they were held this summer.“I think the pressure is rising,” Hartung said. “I understand it’s difficult to postpone and there needs to be careful planning, but me, personally, I would wish for them to take a decision sooner rather than later.”Brendan Schwab, the executive director of the World Players Association, an umbrella body for player unions worldwide, said athletes have been simply unable to train and organizers have a responsibility to not make responding to the pandemic more difficult. “It’s simply not practical now” to hold the Games safely, he said.While the I.O.C. spoke Sunday of entering a new phase of contingency planning, its work has been underway for some time, Bach acknowledged in an interview with The New York Times last week.A statement by the Australian Olympic Committee hinted toward a yearlong delay. John Coates, the president of the committee, is close to Bach and also leads an I.O.C. group responsible for overseeing the buildup to the 2020 Games.“The A.O.C. says Australian athletes should prepare for a Tokyo Olympic Games in the northern summer of 2021,” its statement read.