More Than $6 Million in Relief Coming for Lower-Ranked Tennis Players
By Christopher ClareyThe leaders of tennis’s governing bodies announced the creation of a relief fund on Tuesday to help lower-ranked players weather the crisis created by the coronavirus pandemic.“It’s taken us a little bit of time, but the good news is that we’ll be addressing this in the right way,” said David Haggerty, the president of the International Tennis Federation.While the final details are still being negotiated, the fund is expected to amount to more than $6 million, with $1 million contributions expected to come from each of the four Grand Slam tournaments: the Australian Open, the French Open, Wimbledon and the United States Open.The men’s and women’s tours — the ATP and the WTA — are also expected to contribute close to $1 million each The I.T.F., which oversees many of the lower-level professional events as well as the Davis Cup and Fed Cup team events, will also contribute, even though it recently announced furloughs and temporary salary reductions. Haggerty said the I.T.F. would contribute out of its reserves.The fund, which is to be administered by the ATP and WTA tours, will primarily benefit men’s and women’s players ranked outside of the top 200 in the world in singles.That group includes veterans who have slipped back and youngsters trying to make their way to the top. The professional tours have been on hiatus since early March because of the pandemic. Wimbledon, which was set to run in late June and early July, was canceled for the first time since 1945, and scores of events at all levels of the tours have been postponed.Though the game’s stars have ample reserves to help them weather this long, unexpected break, lower-ranked players are in a more vulnerable position. The concern among the game’s leaders is that some promising talents may leave the sport altogether.As independent contractors, players could be eligible for unemployment benefits in some countries during the crisis, including the United States. Others should get some help from their national tennis federations, as has already been announced in Britain and France. But many lower-ranked players are on the edge.“Especially outside the top 100, a lot of guys tend to make their living on a week-to-week basis,” said Christopher Eubanks, a 23-year-old American ranked 238th on the ATP Tour. “So any kind of financial assistance would allow us to be able to maintain our necessities. I think having the peace of mind, knowing we have rent and food covered and money to train, would be very helpful.”Eubanks was a collegiate star at Georgia Tech. “Right now, I’m fine financially, but it’s tough to really be able to know,” he said. “You don’t know when this is going to end. It could go for three months or six. Am I OK for six? I hope so, but I am not entirely sure.”One of the sticking points in negotiations has been determining how many players should receive assistance.Some in the game, including the leaders of the Grand Slam events, want to help players ranked from 150 to about 500. Novak Djokovic, the top-ranked men’s player who is also president of the ATP player council, has been pushing for relief for those ranked between 250 and 700. He has support from Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer, who are both also on the player council.“Outside of 250 is where the real financial struggle is,” Djokovic wrote in a message sent to a group of players last week. “We feel that we all need to get together and help these guys out.”He added: “Many of them are thinking to leave pro tennis because they just can’t survive financially. Unfortunately, there is a very large amount of players in the group between 250 and 700 that is not supported by federations or don’t have sponsors.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Djokovic, Federer and Nadal, who all have earned more than $100 million in career prize money, have proposed that the top 100 men’s singles players contribute to the relief fund on a sliding scale, with those in the top five contributing $30,000 and those ranked from 51 to 100 contributing $5,000. Top 20 doubles players would also contribute $5,000 each.In total, this would generate about $1 million, which would come on top of the more than $6 million to be contributed by the seven governing bodies.But Djokovic said in an Instagram Live session on Tuesday that the players had not embraced the scaled concept and that any donations to the fund from them would be voluntary. It is unclear whether the leading women’s players are considering a similar proposal, but Steve Simon, the chief executive of the women’s tour, confirmed that the WTA had already provided approximately $3 million in relief to its players. He said that had come through rebates on membership fees and from payment of the equivalent of first-round prize money for the BNP Paribas Open tournament, which was postponed shortly before it was to begin in early March in Indian Wells, Calif.First-round prize money in the main draw of the singles tournament was supposed to be $18,155. Simon said the players had been paid out of tour funds. It remains unclear precisely how much men’s and women’s singles players will receive from the new joint relief fund. Djokovic and the players’ group were pushing to provide a total of $10,000 from the fund to each man ranked between 250 and 700 who meet certain criteria.