Westminster Dog Show Photos: Ready for Prime Time
Supported byBy The New York TimesThey gave the hounds and the herders the once over at the Westminster Dog Show on Sunday. The bassets and the beagles, the collies and the corgis. Monday was showtime for the toy and nonworking groups. The Havanese and the Maltese, the Finnish Spitz and the French Bulldogs.Each one will be groomed and pampered, allowed a few snacks and even a nap or two, and then poked and prodded and allowed to preen. On Tuesday night, the judges will have culled a field of more than 2,600 to a final seven for the finale at Madison Square Garden. Only one will be left then, for best in show. For now, take a moment to celebrate them all.The feeling when you roll up to the dog show like, “I’m heeeerrrre everybody!”Just chilling.Why so serious, Irish setter?There’s nothing a fresh pedicure can’t fix.A water bowl? These dogs do not have time for water bowls.All dogs are good. Only some are fabulous.There are so many terrier breeds — 32 in all — that they get their own group.Wait for it ….Clifford, the big red dog, is a Leonberger. And no joke: His name really is Clifford.A xoloitzcuintli, one of the newest breeds at Westminster, staked out an upper-deck seat at Madison Square Garden.Terriers on parade.Sutton, a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, in for a mist and a brush.“Just take me somewhere there’s grass please.”Best in nap.“So I was thinking, maybe next year we bring the big crate?”Westminster’s guide to breeds makes the Borzoi sound like a great catch, with “a gentle temperament and striking good looks.”A poodle, left, heads toward the competition floor."You said this wouldn’t take long. Five, 10 minutes tops, you said.”What’s better than a Bichon Frise? Bichons Frises.It is perfectly acceptable to tease the Pomeranians.It is important to dress for the occasion, regardless of the time of day.With no firehouses or Disney villains in sight, a group of Dalmatians waits at Pier 94.A Maltese (we promise there is a dog under there) is groomed ahead of judging.Good dogs!