Grappling With Coronavirus, Tokyo Olympic Leaders Have No Good Options
By Andrew Keh and Ben DooleyIn his two decades as a consultant to organizations vying to host the Olympic Games, Terrence Burns helped write and review official bids and plans from dozens of potential candidate cities.In all those bids, he said, discussions of potential disruptions to the event were fairly narrow in scope: mostly natural disasters, like earthquakes or fires, and, more recently, terrorist attacks.“I’ve never seen an Olympic organizing committee asked, ‘Are you prepared for a global pandemic?’” Burns said this week.Now, with just under five months to go before the scheduled opening of the Summer Olympics in Tokyo on July 24, organizers in Japan and at the International Olympic Committee headquarters in Switzerland are grappling with the coronavirus outbreak, which is threatening to derail the world’s largest sporting event.In preparing for the Olympics, Japan’s public health planning until now had focused on the prevention of measles and rubella, sexually transmitted diseases and food poisoning. A new disease, like the coronavirus, was not central to their calculations.Still, as the virus has begun to spread through the country, officials in Japan have played down suggestions that plans for the Games could be altered or even canceled. At a news briefing on Wednesday, the chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihide Suga, said that preparations for the Games were proceeding “as planned,” adding that the Olympic torch would begin its journey to Japan in March according to schedule.The I.O.C. has also declined to entertain the possibility that the Games might not take place exactly as planned.But sporting events in Japan and elsewhere are already being canceled, as governments try to discourage large gatherings in major cities.Many who have procured tickets and made travel plans are now wondering whether they will have to scrap them.“We’ve had our first guests calling to ask questions about canceling,” Anbritt Stengele, the president of Sports Traveler, a travel agency specializing in packages to international sporting events, said this week. “Everyone in the industry is monitoring it and concerned.”People across the Olympic world have begun to ponder, then, what might happen if the coronavirus has not been brought under control before the summer.“I’m sure somewhere within the walls of the I.O.C. headquarters there’s a big board with various scenarios on it where people are thinking about, ‘OK, what do we do in a worst-case situation?” said Dick Pound, a longtime I.O.C. member.There are options, of course, according to people like Burns who have worked with the Olympics for decades. None are very appealing.One theoretical solution involves moving the Olympics to a different locale — perhaps a city that has recently hosted the Games, like London, or one that might be gearing up to, like Los Angeles.It has happened with other major sports events. The 2003 Women’s World Cup was relocated from China to the United States during the outbreak of SARS.But the Women’s World Cup, particularly back then, was a considerably smaller event in scope than the Olympics, with far fewer traveling fans, athletes, sponsors and media members. And in general, stadiums that can accommodate soccer, the world’s most popular sport, are easy to find. Venues that can host surfing, sailing, equestrian dressage and track cycling? Less so.Olympic host cities block out rooms in countless hotels. They reserve high-profile venues, generate public safety and transportation plans, and deal with a host of other logistical and legal issues years in advance, in anticipation of tens of thousands of visitors.“Who could put on an event the size and scope of the Olympic Games even beginning today, five months out?” Pound said. “Nobody, realistically.”There is also the question of whether it would even make sense amid a viral epidemic to have thousands of people from around the world congregate in another city and then return to their homes.Yasuyuki Kato, professor of infectious diseases at the International University of Health and Welfare in Narita, Japan, noted that the Games could act as “a hub to disseminate the virus to other countries.”The Olympics have been canceled outright three times — in 1916, 1940 and 1944 — during the world wars.The prospect of a cancellation now, when so many parties have invested billions of dollars and years of labor — and have legal contracts — seems almost unthinkable.Broadcasters have carved out huge programming blocks, and marketers have built campaigns meant to culminate in Tokyo. Athletes have trained for years to appear on that stage.“I’ll tell you who definitely doesn’t want to cancel is NBC,” said Jules Boykoff, a professor of politics and an expert on Olympic history at Pacific University in Oregon. “They have put billions into the rights to these Olympics. There will be serious disgruntlement from those who have power. They will insist that the Games go on.”A spokesman for NBC said, “The safety of our employees is always our top priority, but there is no impact on our preparations at this time.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The spread of viruses can be suppressed in warmer months, and Melissa Nolan, an expert on infectious diseases at the University of South Carolina, said “most predictions estimate we’ll see a major decline by July.”But Pound said he believed any decision to cancel or modify the Games would have to be initiated by late May.Asked about Pound’s comments, Suga, Japan’s chief cabinet secretary, said they were “not the official view of the I.O.C.” And the Tokyo 2020 organizing committee, responding to questions from The New York Times, said that it was “not considering canceling.”In 2001, days after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, organizers of the Ryder Cup, a team golf competition between the United States and Europe that was historically staged in odd-numbered years, decided to postpone the event for 12 months after top golfers like Tiger Woods expressed concern about flying. To accommodate the change, the Presidents Cup, a team golf competition that had been staged in even-numbered years, was also pushed back a year, to 2003.A similar but more complicated sort of rejiggering would be required if the Olympics were to be postponed by a few months or a full year.Pushing the Games to the summer of 2021 would put them in direct conflict with world championship events in several sports, which would most likely have to be moved as well.Holding the Games just a few months later would put them in direct competition with a host of other professional sports competitions that would not move to accommodate them. For example, while N.B.A. basketball players are available in July, they are not available in October.In addition, NBC is busy with football in the fall, while its summer programming is largely dedicated to the Olympics. “Olympic parties don’t want to host Olympic Games in the middle of the N.F.L. football season for obvious financial reasons,” Burns said.With few good options, organizers could be forced to get creative.One way to satisfy broadcasters could be to hold the events behind closed doors, a nod to the reality that most fans watch the Games on television. But it’s unclear whether public safety concerns would be addressed if thousands of athletes, coaches and staff members from around the world were still congregating in competition venues.Or could the Olympics go on in Tokyo as planned — with, perhaps, travel from certain countries barred, screening zones in every venue and public space, and plenty of hand sanitizer and masks on hand?At some point, though, such an event might not feel like the Olympics, which is supposed to be a peaceful celebration of people from more than 200 countries. Can the Olympics be the Olympics without majestic opening and closing ceremonies in packed stadiums, or if events are spread out across multiple cities?The questions may grow louder as the virus spreads further.