How Sports Adapt: A Marathon Indoors and Drive-In Soccer
German Silva used his race winnings to bring electricity to his hometown. Now, he’s running to honor the medical personnel on the front lines of the coronavirus pandemic.By Jeré LongmanGerman Silva of Mexico came to fame — and nearly infamy — when he turned prematurely into Central Park in the final mile of the 1994 New York City Marathon, realized his mistake, backtracked and still pulled off a victory with a display of calm persistence.Afterward, he used his race winnings to help bring electricity to his remote home village of Tecomate, in Veracruz, then won New York again in 1995. Now 52, Silva still possesses a keen sense of social responsibility.On Sunday, he ran 26.2 miles on his treadmill at home in Querétaro, Mexico, urging others to run anywhere from a kilometer to a marathon to honor the doctors, nurses and other medical personnel on the front lines of the coronavirus pandemic.With friends and marathon luminaries like Frank Shorter, Bill Rodgers and Paula Radcliffe cheering him on via Zoom, Silva completed his run in 2 hours 56 minutes, achieving his goal to break three hours. Michael Capiraso, president and chief executive of New York Road Runners, held up a medal in a virtual awards ceremony. John Cahill, a 96-year-old runner, was scheduled to support Silva by running five kilometers, or 3.1 miles, in Salt Lake City.With more than 160,000 deaths worldwide from Covid-19, economic suffering and millions quarantined at home, Silva said in email messages and a brief interview during his run, “The world needs motivation and to keep inspired with hope.”The Danish Superliga, the country’s top soccer division, had already announced that when play resumed there would be no fans in the stands, at least until August. So F.C. Midtjylland, the league leader when play was suspended, came up with an idea to keep fans involved: drive-in soccer.The team will allow 2,000 cars into the parking lot by the stadium to watch the action on giant screens. With spectators staying in their cars, there will be no interaction that would risk spreading the virus. Commentary will be available on the car radio, and admission will be free.“Our goal is to create the best stadium experience,” said Preben Rokkjaer, the team’s marketing director. “That does not change because of corona; it just makes some other conditions.”The screens will be about 500 square feet, and the team says if the drive-in is a success, it will go for even bigger screens. (For comparison, the enormous screen at the Dallas Cowboys’ stadium is more than 10,000 square feet.) Video of fans in the parking lot will be shown inside the stadium to create atmosphere.The B.T. Nyheder newspaper asked the question that everyone else may have been afraid to: How will fans, sequestered in their cars, go to the bathroom?“We hope, of course, that they will do this at home,” Rokkjaer said. “But if you are going to the toilet, you have to flash your lights, and a guard will come and pick you up and make sure the toilet is cleaned afterward.”No date has been scheduled for the return of the league, but teams are hoping for late May. VICTOR MATHERThe national soccer league in Turkmenistan resumed play on Sunday, with about 500 fans in attendance.Turkmenistan, which has an authoritarian government, is one of the few countries that do not officially have any reported coronavirus cases, although Iran, next door, has tens of thousands. Reporting on the virus in the country has been sparse, and its president has suggested an herb as a possible cure.It is one of the few countries that has allowed soccer to return.The game between Altyn Asyr and the league leader, Kopetdag, was the first in Turkmenistan since March 20. It was played in Ashgabat, the capital, and ended in a 1-1 tie. The league continued play on Monday, with Ahal beating Sagadam, 2-0.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The Belarusian Premier League is the only European league that has continued playing. Tajikistan began its season earlier this month without fans. DANIELLE ALLENTUCKSome of the best sources for consistent baseball laughs are Jomboy Media’s humorous breakdowns of baseball incidents: brawls, brush backs and bat flips.Jomboy also became well known for helping to expose the Houston Astros’ sign stealing scheme with a video highlighting players banging on a trash can to signal pitches.But no Major League Baseball, no Jomboy, right? Nope. The return of Taiwan’s Chinese Professional Baseball League has brought baseball to the sports-starved, and new content for the Jomboy crew.