The Making of Marcus Rashford
The Manchester United star has put his shoulder behind an effort to make sure children don’t go hungry during lockdown. He’s doing it, he says, because he knows the feeling.By Rory SmithThe whole story can be distilled from the single conversation that started it all. A few weeks ago, Marcus Rashford was sitting at home with his family, watching the news pour in and the storm clouds gather.Country after country was going into lockdown because of the coronavirus: Italy first, then Spain, then France. It seemed it was only a matter of time before Britain followed suit. Rashford and his family, like the rest of us, started chewing over what might happen next, all the what-ifs that come with a great unknown, as he put it.But as they talked, Rashford found himself thinking less about how the crisis might affect him as he is now — a Premier League star, a household name, a multimillionaire athlete, the homegrown jewel in Manchester United’s crown — and more about how it would have affected him as he was then.What happened next, in terms of its speed and scale, was remarkable. In the space of a few weeks, Rashford went from searching for charities that work to alleviate hunger to providing the impetus for a campaign that has, so far, helped provide more than two million British children with food.(Here is how fast it has grown: When Rashford first agreed to a Zoom interview late last month, the figure stood at 1.3 million; by the time the interview happened, he said proudly that it was 1.76 million; a week or so later, he posted to his social media pages that the total had surpassed two million.)But all of it came about only because, for all that his life has changed beyond recognition in the last five years, Rashford’s reflex is still to think from the perspective of what his life was like before.He remembers it as clear as day, right down to the route numbers of the buses he had to take to get from his home, in Northern Moor, in Manchester’s southern sprawl, to training with United’s academy in Salford, to the east of the city: “The 41 into town, then the 143 to Salford.” He remembers how touched he was when one of his mother’s friends volunteered to drive him in her car, even though it was out of her way.He remembers the rhythm of his days: his mother, Melanie, leaving for work at 8 a.m.; arriving at school a little after that for what is known in Britain as breakfast club, where children who have not had a chance to eat at home are offered porridge, eggs, toast and orange juice.He remembers that, of his group of five close friends, three would eat packed lunches, provided from home. He would often ask one of them to “get his dad to put an extra biscuit in for me.” He remembers that his school meals were paid for by the state and that there was a stigma, one he did not understand, to being a free school meal kid.And he remembers that there were children in his school “who had it far tougher,” whose parents struggled with depression or drug dependency or did not work or were “never there.” Their home lives made him feel as if he were one of the lucky ones.That he remembers all of that should not, really, be a surprise. Soccer players age in a curious way. They seem, in some lights, eternally young, the consequence of a life lived exclusively in the pursuit of their profession, stripped of any and all experiences that are not directly related to on-field performance. From another angle, they are prematurely old, teenagers and young adults eroded, a little, by the sorts of intense pressures few of us encounter so early in our careers.Rashford is a case in point. He was 18 when he careered into soccer’s consciousness in 2016, scoring twice for Manchester United against Arsenal in his Premier League debut. Within four months, he was on England’s squad for the European Championship. Since then, he has become a fixed star in the Premier League firmament, arguably the central figure at United, if not officially the club’s captain then, to some extent, an avatar of its soul.And yet for all that he has done, as established a presence as he is, Rashford is only 22. “The day after his debut, he went back to school,” John Shiels, the chief executive of Manchester United’s charitable foundation, said.Most of Rashford’s friends are now “starting to leave university,” he said, and take their first steps into careers that might last for decades. His time as a soccer player, he knows, will not last that long. It is a life condensed. He remembers what things used to be like, in other words, because it was not that long ago.“I always said that if I was ever in a position to make a difference, then I would,” Rashford said. He never took for granted the kindnesses that were shown to him. It is why, he said, he makes a point of stopping for pictures with fans. An act that small, he feels, might just change a life.The causes he chooses to support tend to be ones that are close to his heart: He has judged poetry competitions, learned sign language, encouraged children to read. Last Christmas, Rashford began an initiative to encourage people to donate boxes of essential items to three charities working with Manchester’s homeless population. “He’s a Manchester lad,” Shiels said. “Those things mean a lot to him.”It was also why, in March, when he started thinking about what lockdown would have been like for him as he was, about what it would have meant to him not to be allowed to go to school, his first thought was about those children, like him, who relied on school to provide food.“I didn’t really have an option but to go to breakfast club,” he said. “But I enjoyed it. I was with my friends from 8 in the morning to 6 at night, when my Mum came to pick me up. The schools are obliged to give kids the right sort of food, the food they need, whereas with a packed lunch it could be anything. I know there is a stigma to it, but it never made sense to me, really.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.That, then, is where the current story began. Rashford did his research. Some 1.5 million children qualify for free school meals in England, and as many as 700,000 more live in poverty but do not have access to such programs, according to the Children’s Society, a charity that works to support vulnerable children. “It is shocking, really,” he said.He had an idea, but only a vague one. “We wanted to help, but we didn’t really know where to start,” he said. He has learned, from experience, that having money and a desire to help is not enough, that there are thousands of unforeseen complications.He looked at a handful of charities that might have fit the bill before alighting on FareShare.“We wanted to reach as many people as possible,” Rashford said. He made a donation, and set about promoting FareShare’s work as much as he could. It was not an idea he had and left behind: Rashford gets updates every few days about how the work is going. (Rashford says he is more concerned by the number of children reached than the amount of money he has raised.) That first conversation was about eight weeks ago. Since then, FareShare has seen the amount of donated food double; it has been deluged with donations of cash, too.At the same time, demand for its services is three times greater than it used to be. According to a report by the Food Foundation, 200,000 children in Britain have missed meals during lockdown because their families “could not access food,” while half a million more who normally rely on free school meals have received no substitute at all.Rashford does not, particularly, want credit for his efforts trying to fill that gap. He is quick to offer praise to the supermarkets that have donated food, the “big companies” that have stepped up. “I didn’t make it happen,” he said. “I just gave them that extra push.”