It’s Opening Day. Baseball Is Closed.
By Tyler KepnerLeave it to Rogers Hornsby, who starred for the St. Louis Cardinals a century ago, to find the words that neatly fit our troubled times.“People ask me what I do in winter when there’s no baseball,” Hornsby once said. “I’ll tell you what I do. I stare out the window and wait for spring.”Spring is here, but baseball — alas — is not. Major League Baseball had planned to open its gates on Thursday with a full slate of games, spread out from Toronto to San Diego, Seattle to Miami. It was to be the earliest leaguewide opener ever, with a few more off days baked into the regular season and the World Series still scheduled to end before November.Now those plans, like seemingly everything else in the world, have been scrambled by the coronavirus pandemic. The season has been postponed indefinitely, the players scattered, the ballparks shuttered. Mike Trout practices chipping from his balcony to his foyer. Gerrit Cole and his wife play catch in their yard. And Noah Syndergaard undergoes Tommy John surgery, because the Mets are still the Mets.The opening day we expected is gone: the traditional parade in Cincinnati; the afternoon chill of the games in the Midwest and Northeast; the red, white and blue bunting along the facing of mezzanines; the ace-versus-ace matchups in 15 ballparks. The natural rhythms of the pastime are off.Alex Trautwig/MLB, via Getty ImagesThe Mets’ Citi Field on opening day, 2018.Citi Field this week.“You get so close to opening day and the start of the season and it’s not here,” Yankees Manager Aaron Boone said on Wednesday. “All the work that goes into that, that’s disappointing. That’s frustrating. But you also temper it with: This is all bigger than me and us and baseball.”Instead of games, we have negotiations, as the players and the owners try to account for service time in case the season never takes place. If a season is played, myriad details would have to be sorted: When would it start, how many games would be played and when would it end? Could there be more doubleheaders, with each game lasting only seven innings, minor league style? Perhaps neutral-site postseason games stretching into November, and maybe beyond?It is all under consideration as baseball, like every other industry, plunges into the great unknown.As fans, we can dive into new baseball books — “The Wax Pack” by Brad Balukjian, “Swing Kings” by Jared Diamond, “Buzz Saw” by Jesse Dougherty, and more. We can sharpen our knowledge from the trove of trivia quizzes on Sporcle. And we can hop into the YouTube time machine and pull up a game from the past.For its part, MLB Network is gamely simulating opening day on Thursday with a marathon of five past openers, from noon to midnight, and M.L.B. will stream 30 games on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube — one classic game for each club. But even that fun is tinged with the uncertainty of the present.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.There’s a rookie Derek Jeter in 1996, punctuating his first opener with a home run for the Yankees in Cleveland. Jeter is scheduled for induction to the Hall of Fame in July, but will it be safe to cram 80,000 people into cozy Cooperstown, N.Y.? There’s Madison Bumgarner in 2017, homering twice for the San Francisco Giants in Arizona. Bumgarner is the new ace of the Diamondbacks, but when will he actually take the mound in Sedona red?Jonathan Daniel/Getty ImagesThe Chicago White Sox’s Guaranteed Rate Field on opening day, 2018.Guaranteed Rate Field this week.Every other season, opening day lines up well with the words of George Costanza, that infamous former Yankees executive: “Spring! Rejuvenation! Rebirth! Everything’s blooming, all that crap!” This year, the flowers may have already bloomed by the time the games start, and it might even be summer.But when baseball returns — if it does — opening day will represent more than usual, a powerful signal that we can all resume our comfortable routines. No other sport serves as such a daily companion for its fans: at the ballpark, on TV, radio or smartphone, even just somewhere in the background.“Our job when we come back, ultimately, is going to be bigger than the game and all of us as well,” Boone said. “As we’ve seen throughout time, sports can play a role in the healing, a diversion, a distraction, a sense of normalcy.”We need baseball out there beyond our windows. Until it returns, we are all Rogers Hornsby.