How Skiing Through a Pandemic Can Create a Community Crisis
By Shauna FarnellAs winter sports resorts in North America closed in response to the coronavirus outbreak, skiers and snowboarders began flocking to backcountry trails or to slopes where they could trek uphill and then take a downhill run. Though the activities are not forbidden, public officials have begun imploring the skiers and snowboarders to scale back.The crowds not only add to the risk of spreading the virus, but they have also alarmed emergency workers in many mountain communities, who see an increased threat of avalanches and of severe injuries that can divert medical resources needed to cope with the pandemic.A snowboarder near Telluride, Colo., was seriously injured on Tuesday in what officials described as a human-triggered avalanche, necessitating the deployment of a search and rescue team.“We had more than 30 people involved in that rescue, 30 people who would otherwise not be together at all,” Tor Anderson, one of the rescuers with San Miguel County Search and Rescue, said. “When you think about everyone involved — the helicopter pilot, the local residents who showed up to help — this is totally unnecessary contact because someone made a bad decision.”The snowboarder was airlifted to a hospital in Grand Junction, Colo., Anderson said, and was expected to be occupying a bed in the intensive care unit for quite a while.“What happens in two weeks when people need all those beds for people dying from Covid-19?” Anderson said, referring to the disease caused by the virus. “What happens when that person gets Covid from being in the hospital? This is an unbelievably unprecedented time. We have to think more responsibly.”A Colorado stay-at-home order, which went into effect on Thursday, does not prohibit activity on the state’s mountains. But on Friday, Gov. Jared Polis held a news conference to clarify the order and strongly discouraged traveling to the mountains for exercise.“It is not a competition to see what you can get away with,” said Polis, who had ordered the resorts to close on March 15.“If you need to recreate and you love our outdoors,” he added, “do it in communities close to your home. This pandemic is not a vacation. It’s not the time to drive two or three hours from Denver to mountain communities, many of which are reeling from the crisis.”Backcountry trails near major cities and closed ski areas with so-called uphill access have been especially crowded since resorts shut down operations, officials said.“The last couple of weekends have been downright nuts,” said Scott Schell, executive director of the Northwest Avalanche Center in Seattle. “A lot of people living in the Seattle metropolitan area — people who are pent up — are skiing even though ski areas are closed. The parking lots have been packed.”Officials in mountain communities have advised low-risk options — for example, cross-country skiing rather than backcountry turns on steep slopes.“Your day of fun should not come at the expense of us dropping everything while dealing with this public health crisis to come save you,” Susan Lilly, the San Miguel County public information officer, said after imploring people to be careful.Across Canada and the northwestern United States, avalanche forecasts have been halted, at least in part because they might promote mountain activities and steer skiers and snowboarders to sites far from home.The forecasts have continued at the Colorado Avalanche Information Center, yet the snowboarder injured near Telluride, for example, rode in an area that the information center had specifically cited as a high avalanche risk.“From a broad perspective, it’s great people are getting out and doing activities that help them during these difficult times,” Ethan Greene, the director of the Colorado Avalanche Information Center, said. There’s a lot of ways to recreate safely, but people flocking to one area is difficult from a public health perspective.”Another worry for search and rescue groups is that many people heading to avalanche-prone slopes do not have appropriate equipment or awareness of safe routes. They are also congregating in large groups in parking lots and on trails, officials said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“Besides not social distancing, our biggest concern is that people who would normally be on the ski areas feeling safe are in the backcountry unprepared,” Dawn Wilson, a spokeswoman for Alpine Rescue Team, said. “People are going out without transceivers and beacons. They don’t know the avalanche dangers. They don’t know what they’re doing.”Even among those accustomed to the rigors of the backcountry, expectations have changed quickly.Tim Wenger of Palisade, Colo., met last week with a friend on Vail Pass — at a popular trailhead parking lot that has since been closed — for a morning of backcountry snowboarding. The pair chose the area because the Colorado Avalanche Information Center rated it “low” for avalanche risk.“I’m glad we got there early,” he said on Thursday. “A lot of people had the same idea. We kept our distance. We made a plan beforehand to break our own trail and stick to our own route. I don’t recall seeing people congregating or being disrespectful. It seemed like a lot of avid local backcountry skiers on top of their game.”Nonetheless, Wenger, who lives about two hours away, said that trip might have been his last for a while.“Given this new order from the governor, my plan is to wait it out,” he said, referring to Polis’s stay-at-home order. “If you’re going to recreate, it’s important to stay close to home.”More and more communities are denying uphill access to slopes, though some will still allow it as long as local residents are the primary beneficiaries and rescue crews are not diverted from helping the sick.