They Played Sports at the Highest Level. Now Their Job Is to Save Lives.
By Salim ValjiThe four-time Olympic gold medalist Hayley Wickenheiser of Canada was around 10 years old when she first had the idea of being both a professional hockey player and a doctor. Wickenheiser, now 41, grew up in Shaunavon, Saskatchewan, a town of fewer than 2,000 people and less than two square miles in size. A young girl in the area had been severely injured after getting hit by a grocery delivery van.“I remember going to the hospital with all the kids in the neighborhood and just being really inspired and intrigued by the doctors and nurses that were taking care of her,” Wickenheiser said in a telephone interview.“That’s how it all started. At that age, I had two goals: to play for the Edmonton Oilers and to go to Harvard Medical School.”After retiring in 2017 as Team Canada’s career scoring leader, Wickenheiser enrolled in medical school at the University of Calgary, then took on the role as an assistant director of player development for the Toronto Maple Leafs in 2018. She was in the midst of her clinical rotation in emergency rooms around Toronto two weeks ago, when medical students and trainees were pulled from their assignments as the number of coronavirus cases in the country reached a critical point.As of Tuesday afternoon, there have been more than 1.3 million coronavirus cases and 81,106 virus-related deaths recorded worldwide. More than 30 percent of those diagnosed cases are in the United States. Canada is home to more than 17,000 cases, or just over 1 percent.Medical students aren’t allowed to directly treat patients who have contracted Covid-19, so Wickenheiser has been gathering personal protective equipment, or P.P.E., for front line workers and helping with contact tracing of diagnosed patients to track the spread of the virus.“I remember when the first Covid patient came through the emergency room doors in the hospital I was at, one of the doctors I was with did not physically want to go into the room,” she said. “They didn’t feel protected or that they had enough P.P.E. and they didn’t really know what they were dealing with.”One morning in early March, after a particularly unsettling shift, Wickenheiser, a member of the International Olympic Committee’s Athletes’ Commission, was stunned to read that the I.O.C. still was planning for the Summer Olympics to continue as scheduled in Tokyo starting in July.“I kept on seeing this blatant, ‘We are going ahead no matter what,’ kind of attitude and I just thought, ‘How can you be speaking?’” she said. “It was making me crazy. Every day I was losing sleep listening to this dialogue.”Wickenheiser voiced her concerns to Canadian and international Olympic leaders before publishing a statement to her social media accounts on March 17 imploring the I.O.C. to make a decision about postponing or canceling the Games.“I think the I.O.C. insisting this will move ahead, with such conviction, is insensitive and irresponsible given the state of humanity,” she wrote. “We don’t know what’s happening in the next 24 hours, let alone in the next three months.”Five days later, the Canadian Olympic Committee announced it would not send the country’s athletes to Tokyo in 2020 and called on the I.O.C. to postpone the games, a decision the I.O.C. made with the Japanese government on March 24.Wickenheiser has since been in contact with the office of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada to help promote social distancing advisories to the public and has contributed to his #plankthecurve social media campaign.She isn’t the only elite athlete now on the front lines in the fight against the spread of the coronavirus.Kansas City Chiefs offensive lineman Laurent Duvernay-Tardif, the N.F.L.’s only active player with a medical degree, said he had only a basic understanding of the virus when he was asked about it by a reporter during media interviews ahead of the Super Bowl.Duvernay-Tardif, who got his medical degree from McGill University in Montreal, hopes to specialize in emergency medicine but isn’t currently part of a medical residency program and cannot assist doctors and other medical staff in treating patients. After he returned from his post-Super Bowl sailing vacation, he reached out to Quebec government officials asking how he could help. Like Wickenheiser, Duvernay-Tardif has been using his social media platforms to communicate vetted health care guidance to his followers, totaling nearly 200,000 between Instagram and Twitter.“So far I’ve done a bunch of interviews and gone live on different platforms, reinforcing how important it is to do social distancing, basic hygiene like hand-washing, and how we’re going to manage this thing,” Duvernay-Tardif said in a telephone interview.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Myron Rolle was drafted by the Tennessee Titans in 2010 and spent three seasons playing professional football before retiring to pursue a career in medicine. Rolle, a Rhodes Scholar, is currently a neurosurgery resident at the Harvard Medical School and at Massachusetts General Hospital, where he treats patients with various ailments, including ones that show signs of the Covid-19. Massachusetts has the United States’ fourth highest rate of infection per capita, with 15,202 reported cases.“I think the biggest surprise for me is how infectious it is,” he said. “People had mentioned that it’s similar to the flu or common cold, but this virus goes from person to person without discrimination.”Regardless of their specialties, all three athletes drew parallels between competing in professional sports and working in the health care field. They said skills like time management, managing intense pressure and perseverance were easily transferable between vocations.“Football’s taught me discipline, focus, hard work, dedication, teamwork, preparation, and overcoming adversity,” Rolle said.Wickenheiser has related her medical colleagues’ traits to her athletic peers as a way of supporting their efforts during the current crisis.“I was talking to a friend who has been an emergency physician for 20 years and she was describing how she had to shut down communications with friends because she was getting text messages from people saying how they were so sorry for her and grieving that she had to do her job and she didn’t feel that way at all,” Wickenheiser said.