Why the U.S. Lagged Behind in the Drive to Postpone the Summer Olympics
By Matthew Futterman and Andrew KehTwo years ago, after revelations a team doctor had abused hundreds of gymnasts, the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee underwent an overhaul designed to restore and instill confidence and trust among thousands of American athletes.Yet, in recent days as a swelling tide of athletes openly worried about the ability to train and prepare for the Summer Olympics as the coronavirus pandemic shuttered facilities and people were told to remain inside their homes, the committee hunkered down and sided with the International Olympic Committee’s insistence on delaying any decision to press forward with the Games. The implicit message: stay healthy and safe, but try to keep training for a July Olympics.Now that the I.O.C. has decided to postpone the Games, with the United States one of the last large organizations to join the clamor for the move, athletes are questioning how leaders who were brought on to more effectively listen to and support athletes took so long to hear what they were saying.“We did have an opportunity to be leaders on the issue, and I feel like it was a little bit of a missed opportunity,” said Han Xiao, a former table tennis athlete who is chairman of the U.S.O.P.C.’s Advisory Council.Xiao spoke early last week with members of the U.S.O.P.C.’s executive board, relaying concerns athletes had about their inability to train and their concern that a mass gathering like the Olympics would exacerbate the global health crisis. He said he was surprised Friday when Susanne Lyons, the U.S.O.P.C.’s chair, and Sarah Hirshland, its chief executive, echoed the stance of Thomas Bach, the president of the I.O.C., that there was no immediate need to decide on whether to postpone the Games.That night, the U.S.O.P.C. opened an online poll of potential Olympians. By Monday, nearly 70 percent came out in favor of a postponement, leading the U.S.O.P.C. to shift its position. “Over that weekend things got corrected,” Xiao said. “But it was frustrating.”The turn finally came Monday night, 24 hours after the national Olympic committees in Canada and Australia announced they would not send a team to Tokyo in July. Germany, Brazil and Norway had already come out against a July Olympics. The national federations for swimming and track and field in the U.S. had also publicly come out in favor of a one-year delay.“I really think, at some point, with the survey or without, the Olympic committee should have recognized that the Games should not have gone on,” said Christian Taylor, a two-time gold medalist in the triple jump.In an interview Monday, Lyons said the U.S.O.P.C. had tried to communicate with athletes through emails and a series of teleconferences with members of its athlete advisory commission. She said not all athletes she heard from favored a postponement, especially athletes who had delayed careers and school to train for an Olympic Games this summer.As for the frustration of American athletes who wanted a harder and earlier public push toward postponement, she said she believed she and her organization are more effective when they lobby the I.O.C. privately.“I don’t need to make a headline to communicate with Thomas Bach,” Lyons said. “I have his cellphone number.”Lyons said the United States’ importance historically to the Olympic movement and the outsized share of revenues that flow from U.S. companies to the I.O.C. make taking public stands precarious, because it can seem like the country is throwing its weight around and undermining the movement.“We are listened to in a different way,” Lyons said of Canada and Australia’s decision to lead the effort toward postponement.There is also a significant financial consequence for the U.S.O.P.C. The committee has a revenue-sharing arrangement with the I.O.C. that gives it about 12 percent of the fees from the broadcaster NBC and roughly 20 percent of the I.O.C.’s sponsorship revenue.The broadcast payments from the 2016 Games in Rio de Janeiro totaled $169 million, accounting for about half of the U.S.O.P.C.’s revenues for the next two years. Because the payment is not made until after the Games have occurred, the U.S. committee will have to scramble to fill a significant deficit until the Tokyo Games take place.The delay was especially surprising for Jacob Pebley, 26, a swimmer who had been training at the United States Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs until Gov. Jared Polis of Colorado ordered the state’s gyms and pools closed last Tuesday, nearly a week before the U.S.O.P.C. announced its support for postponing the Olympics.“I’m sure they had thought about it,” Pebley said last Thursday, when he posted a letter to leaders of U.S.A. Swimming arguing for a postponement. “But had they taken the serious steps that were necessary and the situation was calling for?”Pebley said that 10 minutes after he posted his letter, he received a phone call from U.S.A. Swimming asking if he would speak with Tim Hinchey III, the organization’s chief executive, later that afternoon.Hinchey had been speaking with athletes such as Ryan Murphy, Katie Ledecky, and Nathan Adrian, and top coaches for two weeks, and he had grown concerned about the increasing stress and anxiety they were facing. Also, the organization was asking the people who run its pools and participate in its swimming programs to stay home and indoors, out of concern for their health.“Our national team athletes deserved the same,” Hinchey said.Hinchey spoke with Hirshland on Thursday and told her that his organization was moving toward a postponement. She told him the U.S.O.P.C. was trying to listen to everyone. “Her tone was respectful,” Hinchey said of Hirshland.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.While Hirshland and Lyons were speaking to reporters on Friday morning and falling in line with Bach’s position that the spreading Covid-19 crisis did not require an immediate decision, Hinchey was holding a series of video conferences with athletes, coaches, and his advisory committees to get their final approval for the federation’s demand for a postponement.“We realize it may not be the perfect answer but in the short term it allows everyone to do what they should be doing which is stay home,” Hinchey said.While Hinchey was speaking with the swimming community, Max Siegel, the chief executive of U.S.A. Track and Field, was having similar conversations with people at every level of his sport. Siegel said he speaks with many of the leading athletes, agents and coaches nearly every day, so this was nothing new, but early last week he told them to spend a day checking with everyone they work and train with to learn where they stood on postponement.He was told there was near-unanimous support for a delay, a position the organization’s board voted to support in a meeting Thursday night. Siegel then relayed the information to Hirshland and came out publicly with the organization’s position on Saturday.“We wanted to make sure our voice was heard,” Siegel said. “We are really close to our athletes. The best information the U.S.O.P.C. can get is from us.”Lyons said that she and Hirshland have work to do to establish a level of trust with the country’s Olympians. Tokyo will be their first Olympic Games leading their organization.