Will Returning Players Be Out of Shape? Soccer May Need More Subs
FIFA suggested a rule change for when play returns. Plus: bull riding, Formula One and rugby in Australia and New Zealand.By Victor MatherWhen sports do come back, leagues will be trying to pack in as many revenue-generating games as possible. At the same time, many of the players coming out of quarantine may not exactly be in tiptop shape. That combination could prove troublesome.International soccer has proposed a solution: allowing five substitutions a game instead of three. FIFA, the governing body, is suggesting the plan, which would apply through all of next season and through the end of 2021 in international play. A sixth substitute would be allowed in games that go to extra time.The move follows a longtime trend in soccer, which did not allow substitutes at all until 1958. If your team’s fullback broke his leg, he either had to suck it up and continue or the team had to play with 10 men. The 1970 World Cup was the first with substitutes, and three subs were not allowed until the 1998 World Cup.The strict rules led to storied performances such as Franz Beckenbauer playing on in the 1970 World Cup semifinal with his dislocated arm in a sling and Bert Trautmann playing most of the 1956 F.A. Cup final with a broken neck. Those are scenes that FIFA surely doesn’t want coming out of this pandemic.Horse racing continues in at least some states, and some big races are running as scheduled. On Saturday, Oaklawn will hold the Arkansas Derby. And then it will hold it again.With limited opportunities for horses to race, it has been difficult to distinguish the very best runners from the merely good. That means there are dozens of horses whose owners still feel they have a Derby-quality horse.To give as many horses a chance as possible, Oaklawn will run two Arkansas Derbys, with 11 horses in each field. Both races will have the full $500,000 purse, and both will offer full qualifying points for the Kentucky Derby, now scheduled for Sept. 5.Among those in the races are the Louisiana Derby winner, Wells Bayou; the Tampa Bay Derby winner, King Guillermo; and the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile winner, Storm the Court.It’s the first time the Arkansas Derby, which has been run since the 1930s, has been divided into two races. As has been the case since mid-March, there will be no fans at Oaklawn, in Hot Springs, Ark., for the races.Professional Bull Riders held an event in Oklahoma over the weekend, making it one of the first sports to resume in the United States.The Unleash the Beast event was held without fans at the Lazy E Arena, a private ranch in Logan County, Okla. It was originally scheduled to be in Las Vegas.Everyone on site was required to wear face masks and to maintain social distancing. People were also instructed to interact only with people in their designated group, which averaged about six people.“We’ve had plenty of space to be safe and responsible as we get our P.B.R. family back to work,” Sean Gleason, the chief executive of Professional Bull Riders, said in a video shared on his Twitter account. “Hopefully our process will pave the way for other sports.”Fabiano Vieira of Brazil won the two-day event. DANIELLE ALLENTUCKFormula One refuses to rip off the Band-Aid. Almost every week, it cancels another race and inches back the date of its return. This week’s cancellation is the French Grand Prix, scheduled for June 28. It becomes the 10th race of the season to be postponed or canceled. F1 now insists that it will be back in action the week after that, in Austria.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.On the brighter side, some leagues are revving up for a return. Teams in Italy’s top soccer league are being allowed to start training on May 18. The announcement was important enough to be made by the prime minister, Giuseppe Conte.Australia and New Zealand have been praised for their success in containing the virus, and sports are benefiting. The National Rugby League is looking to return May 28, and is clearing hurdles one by one. Players from the one New Zealand-based team in the league, the Warriors, have received permission to travel to Australia, the government said. And strict rules are being put in place, including requiring temperature checks, cleaning all equipment daily and barring players and staff from using public transportation or cabs.Fines have been promised for violators, of which there may be some, if recent history is a guide. Three N.R.L. players were fined $1,000 by the police in Australia on Monday after being pictured camping with a group of about a dozen people, in violation of social distancing rules.