U.S.T.A. Plans a $15 Million Bailout for Various Tennis Groups
By Christopher ClareyIn response to the coronavirus pandemic, the United States Tennis Association will cut its top executives’ salaries by 20 percent for the remainder of 2020 as part of an effort to provide emergency assistance totaling about $15 million to American tennis facilities, teaching professionals and grassroots tennis organizations.The relief program, to be announced on Thursday, comes with professional and most recreational tennis shut down in the country and with this year’s United States Open in doubt.The Open, one of the four Grand Slam tournaments, is the primary source of funding for the U.S.T.A., which oversees tennis in the United States. The tournament generates revenue approaching $400 million each year and, for now, is still scheduled for Aug. 31-Sept. 13 in New York.Unlike Wimbledon, the oldest of the Grand Slam tournaments, which was canceled for the first time since 1945, the U.S. Open does not have pandemic insurance to cover some of its losses.Despite the uncertainty surrounding its flagship event, the U.S.T.A. and Mike Dowse, its new chief executive, determined that it was necessary to support some of the foundations of the sport during this forced, extended hiatus.“We’ve got to keep these tennis clubs and teaching pros afloat through this as much as we can,” said Dowse, who estimated that about “85 percent of tennis facilities” in the United States had closed by the end of March.The U.S.T.A. earmarked about $5 million in grants for tennis facilities that provide access to the general public and that may need financial help to reopen after restrictions related to the virus are lifted.Another $5 million will go to tennis and education programs that support underserved communities.The U.S.T.A. also intends to provide some relief to teaching professionals by helping to cover a significant portion of their 2021 membership dues for the United States Professional Tennis Association (U.S.P.T.A.) and the Professional Tennis Registry (P.T.R.), the two primary organizations that certify teaching professionals in the United States.Those grants are expected to total at least $2.5 million.The P.T.R. has approximately 9,000 members in the United States; the U.S.P.T.A. has approximately 13,500.“I have heard from a lot of our coaches who have either been laid off or furloughed and don’t know where their next paycheck is coming from,” said Dan Santorum, the chief executive of the P.T.R., which has annual dues of $159. “So this kind of assistance from the U.S.T.A. is particularly welcome.”The rest of the funding is expected to go toward support efforts like telephone counseling to cope with emotional effects of the pandemic or legal consulting for those who want to claim government aid provided through the Cares Act.Even if the U.S. Open is canceled, Dowse said on Wednesday that this relief plan would remain in place, funded by about $20 million in cuts that have been made through salary reductions and by lowering expenses in marketing, player development and operations.“These plans will hold,” Dowse said of the relief effort. “This was modeled off what we know we can do, and then in theory if we can do more, we will try to do that as well.”Dowse, a former president of Wilson Sporting Goods, took charge of the U.S.T.A. in January. He said the association’s senior management would take a 20 percent pay cut for the remainder of 2020. Dowse’s salary has not yet been made public, but his predecessor, Gordon Smith, was paid $1.265 million in 2018, according to public filings. Stacey Allaster, the chief executive of the U.S.T.A.’s professional tennis division, was paid $861,232 in 2018.Dowse said directors and managing directors at the U.S.T.A. would take 15 percent pay cuts, and managers 10 percent cuts.Dowse said those affected represent “just over 40 percent of our organization.”“It is in flux,” Dowse said of the U.S. Open’s status, “so we knew we couldn’t wait until that decision was made to act. So we went internal and looked at ways to redeploy money to these initiatives. And ultimately whatever the outcome is on the U.S. Open, we will model it again and see what else we can do.”Dowse said he expected a decision on the U.S. Open to be made by early summer unless governmental decrees change that timeline. The U.S.T.A. has not ruled out postponing the event to a later date in 2020.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“We don’t have a hard date set yet, just because things are changing so fast,” he said. “You can imagine the runway to ramp up the U.S. Open is not a short runway, so I’m thinking probably the latter part of June, sometime in that June time frame.”The indoor tennis facility on the U.S. Open grounds at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center is currently being used as a temporary medical facility with 470 beds. But Dowse said preparations could still be finished for the tournament, which is played at outdoor courts and stadiums elsewhere at the tennis center.The U.S.T.A.’s relief effort is not as wide reaching as one announced on April 3 by the British Lawn Tennis Association, which committed 20 million pounds, or about $25 million, to supporting tennis venues, coaches, officials and touring pros affected by the crisis. The lawn tennis association also announced executive pay cuts and employee furloughs.The L.T.A. is funded in part by the profits from Wimbledon, and its announcement came two days after Wimbledon was canceled.The French Tennis Federation, which stages the French Open, announced a relief plan worth 35 million euros, or $39.2 million, for tennis in that country. The plan, announced on April 10, has not been finalized, but it will include help for lower-ranked professional players.The U.S.T.A. at this stage has chosen not to provide direct assistance to lower-ranked tour players, many of whom are facing significant economic challenges with no tournament earnings for at least four months.Dowse said U.S.T.A. executives had been conferring regularly with leaders of the men’s and women’s tours and the other Grand Slam tournaments about their plans to provide some relief to those ranked outside the top 100 in singles. The men’s tour is considering providing grants as well as interest-free loans up to $20,000 that could be linked to future prize money, although those plans are not yet finalized.