Texans Complete Comeback, Beating the Bills in Overtime
By The Associated PressHOUSTON (AP) — Deshaun Watson spun out of a would-be sack and coolly completed a pass that set up the winning field goal in overtime as the Texans overcame a double-digit deficit in the second half to beat the Buffalo Bills, 22-19, in the first round of the N.F.L. playoffs on Saturday.Both teams punted on their first possessions of overtime — the first extra period in an A.F.C. wild-card game since 2012. On Houston’s next drive, Watson evaded a sack by wriggling away from one defender and bouncing off another before rolling out to find Taiwan Jones for a 34-yard reception to set up first-and-goal.Watson flexed both arms as the crowd at NRG Stadium went wild — knowing the home team was in position to add another comeback win to Houston’s playoff history.“I told myself to stay up. I mean, it’s do-or-die now. I just had to make the play,” Watson said.Ka’imi Fairbairn then kicked a 28-yard field goal to lift Houston to victory.The Texans advance to the divisional round of the playoffs next weekend to face either the Kansas City Chiefs or the Baltimore Ravens depending on the outcome of Saturday night’s game between the Tennessee Titans and the New England Patriots.The Texans scored 19 straight points to take the lead before Bills kicker Stephen Hauschka’s 47-yard field goal tied it with 5 seconds left to force overtime.“We never quit, regardless,” Watson said. “Whatever it takes to get the win. I mean, we’re going to keep fighting.”The win gave the Texans their first playoff victory since the 2016 season and extended Buffalo’s postseason losing streak to six games, dating back to the 1995 season. It was the first wild-card overtime game since the Broncos beat the Steelers 29-23 in the 2011 season.The game conjured memories of another huge comeback in a wild-card game. The last time teams from Houston and Buffalo met in the playoffs it was in a game known as “The Comeback.” The Bills set a record for the largest comeback in N.F.L. history by rallying from a 32-point deficit for a 41-38 overtime win against the Houston Oilers in 1993.This time, Josh Allen and the Bills used a dominant first half to build a 13-point lead and had a 16-0 advantage in the third quarter.Watson had 247 yards passing and ran for 55 yards. The Texans’ DeAndre Hopkins led all players with 90 yards receiving.Allen threw for 264 yards, ran for 92 and caught a touchdown pass on a trick play in the first quarter, but often looked rattled late in his playoff debut.J.J. Watt, a three-time N.F.L. Defensive Player of the Year, had a sack and bolstered Houston’s defense in his return after sitting out since October with a torn pectoral muscle.“This is why you come back,” Watt said. “I don’t know if I meant to come back for these many plays or this much extra time, but these feelings, these emotions, these fans, these players, Deshaun Watson and all the guys on this team, this is why you come back.”Houston struggled to generate offense before halftime and had 81 yards in a first half when Hopkins did not catch a pass.The Texans were finally able to sustain a drive on their third possession of the third quarter when Hopkins had receptions of 14 and 10 yards to help move the ball. The Texans cut their deficit to 10 when Watson dragged two defenders into the end zone on a 20-yard touchdown run.Watson then dived into the end zone for a 2-point conversion that got Houston within 16-8 with about two minutes left in the third.The Bills were driving early in the fourth quarter when Allen was sacked by Whitney Mercilus and fumbled, and it was recovered by Houston’s Jacob Martin at the 50-yard line. Houston cashed in on the miscue with a 41-yard field goal that cut the Bills’ lead to 16-11 with about 11 minutes to go.Watson connected with Carlos Hyde on a 5-yard touchdown pass and Hopkins on a 2-point conversion with about five minutes left to put the Texans ahead, 19-16. Hopkins had a 41-yard reception earlier in that drive.The Bills were in field-goal range on their next drive when Allen got a 14-yard penalty for intentional grounding and Buffalo lost a down to bring up fourth down. They went for it and Allen was sacked by Jacob Martin for a 19-yard loss to give Houston the ball back with 1:35 left. The Texans unsuccessfully went for a fourth-down conversion, giving the ball back to the Bills before Hauschka’s game-tying field goal.Houston trailed 13-0 at halftime and Hopkins fumbled on its second drive of the third quarter to give Buffalo the ball at the Houston 38. Watt sacked Allen for a loss of 8 yards on third down and the Bills settled for a 38-yard field goal to extend the lead to 16-0.Allen scrambled 42 yards for a first down on Buffalo’s first possession for his longest rush of the season. Two plays later, the Bills used some trickery to take the lead when John Brown threw a 16-yard touchdown pass to Allen to make it 7-0. Brown’s pass was wobbly, but Allen was wide open despite having to slow down to grab it.It was early in the second quarter when Allen appeared to lose a fumble. But the play was reviewed and overturned, giving Buffalo the ball at the Houston 32. The Bills were unable to move the ball after that and made a 40-yard field goal to make it 10-0.