World Wars Stopped the Tour de France. Now Coronavirus Has, Too.
The Tour de France will not start on time. But the N.F.L. will allow virtual workouts, and there are some 250 table tennis matches happening, too.By Victor MatherAnother major world sports event has been disrupted by the coronavirus. This time, it’s the Tour de France.The Tour had thus far avoided postponing, but organizers said on Tuesday that the race could not start on time in Nice on June 27 after President Emmanuel Macron said on Monday that public events would be banned through the middle of July.The Tour was scheduled to run for three weeks and end on the Champs-Élysées on July 19. This year’s race was to be heavy on climbing, including a visit to the top of the Grand Colombier in the Alps, and light on time trials.Tour organizers are no doubt hoping for only a brief delay. The schedule immediately after the Tour has opened up some because of the postponement of the Olympics, where the cycling road race was to have been held July 25, about a week after the Tour ended.But if the Tour is delayed much longer, it could bump into the Vuelta a España, scheduled for Aug. 14 to Sept. 6, and the world championships, at the end of September. The first of the three grand tours, the Giro d’Italia, has already been postponed from May and is also looking for a new date. With each Tour normally filling three weeks, the calendar is tight.Christian Prudhomme, the director of the Tour, expressed confidence in March that the race would go on, saying, “Only two world wars were able to stop the Tour de France.” Covid-19 has now done the same.Tuesday’s sports schedule included three soccer games, all friendlies in Sweden, a dozen hockey games in Russia and … more than 250 table tennis matches.Maybe it’s the social distancing between players that the table provides. Maybe it’s … well, that’s all we can think of. But in any case, Russia, Ukraine and the Czech Republic are packing in table tennis matches, running them virtually all day long.Perhaps some Eastern European Ping-Pong enthusiasts are excited about these games, but they could hardly be crossing over to mainstream sports fans. Or could they?At least one group of fans is following table tennis avidly: Of course, that’s gamblers. “Table tennis is the No. 1 draw by a country mile,” the William Hill sportsbook director, Nick Bogdanovich, told The Las Vegas Review Journal. “There’s 90 matches a day, so it adds up.”A Review Journal reporter stayed up late betting the action and actually made a few bucks. His secret: Take the underdog.New on the abbreviated world sports schedule on Tuesday, for some reason, was badminton from Armenia.Burundi has stuck out as one of the few countries in the world, and the only one in Africa, to continue with soccer. It too has now halted play.Curiously, the stated reason had nothing to do with the coronavirus. The president of the soccer federation said it was because stadiums would be needed for election rallies.Formula One continues to rip the Band-Aid off slowly rather than all at once, canceling its races one by one. The latest to go is the French Grand Prix on June 28. That’s 10 races that have been canceled or postponed indefinitely; 12 remain on the schedule for now.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.You know India is taking the coronavirus seriously. Not because the lockdown of more than a billion people has been extended to May 3, but because the Indian Premier League, the enormously popular cricket competition, has been postponed indefinitely. Field hockey, another popular sport in India, has also been shut down.The N.F.L. and its union agreed on Monday to allow teams to conduct virtual workouts until team facilities were allowed to reopen.The virtual off-season will begin on April 20 for teams with new coaches and April 27 for the rest of the league. It will conclude on May 15. Teams will be allowed to hold workouts, classroom instruction and nonfootball educational programs. All activities will be voluntary, and teams are allowed to give players up to $1,500 worth of equipment.“We’ll do the Zoom meetings when we’re allowed to and do all the tele-coaching that we can come up with,” Arizona Cardinals Coach Kliff Kingsbury said. “Everyone is dealing with it, so the teams that are able to adjust and adapt the best are going to have the most success early in the season.”Teams typically begin off-season programs in mid-April. Rookie minicamps are usually scheduled for May, followed by organized team activities and mandatory minicamps.