The Games Will Come Back. The Moments We’ll Miss Are Already Gone.
Supported byBy Michael PowellThe sports seasons of 2020 are about to take a place in the realm of what if.Are we left to imagine Pete Alonso, the Mets’ bear of a first baseman, crashing another 50 home runs? Will we pass the summer arguing how many wins the new Yankee Gerrit Cole might have racked up? How many goals the swift-skating David Pastrnak might have scored for the Bruins in the playoffs? Will regular-season boo birds ever get a chance to remind the Astros they were cheats?Two months ago I wandered into the Los Angeles locker rooms of the Clippers and the Lakers, two of the best basketball teams in our corner of the cosmos cohabitating in one building. I asked about incipient rivalry and all of them said: Wait until the playoffs and hope for a fabled Western Conference finals, LeBron James trying to school Kawhi Leonard, Paul George feinting, taking Anthony Davis off the dribble.Just wait.Absent a virological miracle, this may all be left to fantasy.A virus has accomplished what even World Wars could not. Our major sports — basketball, hockey, soccer and baseball — are shelved for a month or two or perhaps a full season. We are now a quarantine nation, and our sports teams are shuttering alongside us. The N.B.A. announced Wednesday it was suspending games. Hockey, soccer and Major League Baseball have followed suit.Statistical asterisks might attend to careers forever. For older players, like a transcendent James in the late autumn of his N.B.A. career, this will be time perhaps never recaptured.There may be tightfisted holdouts, though not the N.C.A.A., which bailed on its winter and spring championships on Thursday afternoon. To watch a daughter or son play high school or college sports is to empathize with their desire for one more play, one more game. In service of athletic achievement, these people may still crowd into locker rooms and exchange sweaty elbows beneath the basket as referees and coaches and locker room attendants move among them.To try to describe that scene is to recognize its folly.We remain a nation half-aware of its sickly status. Leagues cancel games, governors enforce bans on large gatherings and Broadway theaters close. Yet California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, initially let the Disney Corporation continue to pack crowds into its amusement park before reconsidering and ordering it closed. And the Trump administration continues to let cruise ships set sail.We sports fans are left with our awareness of what will be lost. My sons, Nick and Aidan, and I are lifelong Mets fans, which is to describe hope and despair in a tango. Spring is our favorite season, a time of fantastic prediction and hope without enough games for a proper losing streak. That is taken from us.Before I get too maudlin, let me posit an upside. ESPN reported that the Knicks owner, James Dolan, had argued against suspending the N.B.A. season. He apparently took the view that a quarantined populace could never get enough of his truly wretched basketball team.The league, thank goodness, overruled him.To make sense of all this, I called Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, the chief executive of Resolve to Save Lives, a former New York City health commissioner and President Barack Obama’s director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Frieden cannot guarantee a canceled N.B.A. season — any canceled season — will make a huge difference; he is sure only that if “this virus is bad and if we didn’t act, that would be indefensible.”He divides closures into gray areas and no-brainers. Madison Square Garden, Staples Center and similarly large amphitheaters fall into the latter category. “These arenas cannot have spectators,” he said. “That would be completely irresponsible.”What of outdoor sports? He paused. Sunlight, he noted, is a fine disinfectant, and transmission is much lower outdoors. If baseball and soccer games are played in daylight — who could object to that? — and not under a dome, he sees a window for safe play, even if fans have to remain at home on their couches.Lost games will exact great cost. Closed arenas mean lost ticket, television and radio revenues. Sports profits and salaries are munificent, and one cannot survive without the other. But Frieden told me we have no choice. “The more we can tamp down the epidemic,” he said, “the more quickly we can protect the economy.”Perhaps the greater loss in the season of 2020 will be those for whom the hourglass will run out of sand.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Ryan Zimmerman has had a 15-year celebrated career with the Washington Nationals, and last season he finally played in a World Series, hitting a home run and holding aloft a championship trophy. He gave thought to retirement but returned for perhaps a final run with the only team he has ever played for.Is this how it ends?Carlos Vela, the Mexican forward for Major League Soccer’s Los Angeles F.C., is still swift and brilliant at 31. But a lost season is lost time. And what of LeBron James? At 35, he is playing one of his grandest seasons, his court smarts compensating for any athletic erosion. James will return when the N.B.A. does, but who is to say if age will finally track him to the ground?And what of the Milwaukee Bucks, the finest team in the East, and their transcendent star Giannis Antetokounmpo, who is so intent on dethroning James? Generational feuds, the hunger of the young to vanquish ruling stars, lie at the heart of sport. We had good reason to anticipate such a matchup this spring.