No Live Sports on TV? Consumers Want a Refund
By Kevin DraperJoyce Sanz recently called Comcast hoping to reduce the $164 each month her family pays for cable television and internet. An after-school program manager at an elementary school in Miami, Sanz wanted to trim expenses in case the economic fallout related to the coronavirus pandemic lasts months.Sanz said she asked the Comcast customer service representative for a discount or deferred payment options. No dice. She asked to be charged the prices offered to new customers. No can do.Finally, she spotted a specific line on her bill. “I am paying a sports fee,” she told the representative, recalling the conversation later during an interview.“Oh, we can’t take those out” was the response, leading Sanz to the obvious question:“If you are not giving the service, why do I have to keep paying for it?”Comcast and other cable and satellite TV companies are still providing subscribers with sports channels, of course. Sanz can still watch Fox Sports Florida, Fox Sports Sun and ESPN. But without live games featuring the Miami Heat, Miami Marlins, or other professional and college teams, those channels have been shells of their former selves.Nobody knows when major sports might be played widely again. Games would certainly be embraced by fans, but the sports ecosystem has taken a back seat to deeper concerns of public health and the global economy.But already sports leagues, television networks and television distributors are firing the opening salvos in what will be an exhausting war to determine who should pay for hundreds of millions — perhaps billions — in economic damages.“You always lawyer for the thing that will never happen,” said Erin McPherson, the head of consumer content and partnerships at Verizon. “And the thing that you think will never happen, happened.”As that takes shape, most American households will have little choice but to continue paying for live sports even as sports channels are reduced to reruns of historic games, documentaries and sports video game simulations.“They won’t throw money at their customers when their costs of goods hasn’t changed,” Craig Moffett, a co-founder of the media research firm MoffettNathanson, said of TV distributors.This is not the case in England, where pay television subscribers are more easily able to buy sports channels separately. Sky Sports, the main provider of televised sports, is allowing customers to pause their subscription payments as long as sports remain postponed.Some sports networks abroad are also beginning to push back against leagues. Canal+ in France, Globo in Brazil and NENT in the Nordic countries have all suspended some rights payments.Television is the biggest source of revenue for American sports. When people pay their monthly television bills, their money goes to television distributors, like Comcast, which in turn pay television networks, like ESPN, which in turn pay sports leagues, like the N.B.A. Along the way, everybody keeps a cut.But even if customers do not watch a single game, the majority of what they spend on bundled television packages goes to sports networks. This is because of the structure of the bundles, where customers pay one monthly price for dozens or hundreds of channels.Entertainment is available widely on streaming services, while news and sports programming is increasingly the only reason to still pay for bundled TV.“Sports are the glue that holds the bundle together,” Moffett said. “Without live sports, the value proposition to most households just isn’t terribly compelling anymore.”Television viewership, especially of news programming, is up lately, no doubt the consequence of nearly 300 million Americans under orders to stay at home. But with jobless claims reaching a record high, how many more people will look to cut the cord or, at the very least, push back on being charged for sports without getting live games?“A lot of them are going to get very familiar with how their TV service actually works, and how they can get rid of cable once and for all,” said Dave Warner, who created the website What You Pay for Sports in 2013 to educate fans about their television bills.McPherson, the Verizon executive, said the company had been recently reviewing its contractual relationships with networks and leagues in an attempt to reduce what the roughly four million Fios TV subscribers are paying.“We don’t want to charge our customers for content they aren’t watching and receiving,” she said. “Whether that is going to be in the form of a refund or discontinued billing, we are looking at all of those options right now.”However, Verizon does not feel it can unilaterally rebate subscribers. “We need the broadcasters and RSNs, and the leagues, to cooperate with that approach,” McPherson said.In at least being willing to discuss whether subscribers are currently getting what they pay for, McPherson is alone. AT&T, Comcast, Charter Communications and Dish Network — the four largest pay TV providers in the United States — all declined to make an executive available for an interview or answer questions about what subscribers should expect.Television distributors have historically felt they held little leverage in negotiations with sports networks. What networks pay sports leagues goes up each year. Sports networks raise prices as a result and pass large price increases on to distributors, who pass them on to subscribers.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.One way distributors have pushed back — and tried to deflect subscriber wrath — is by listing the costs for sports as a separate line item in bills, often terming it a “regional sports fee.” It is purposefully made to look like the actual fees and taxes imposed by state or federal regulators, but it is not the same.The model of regional sports networks, which has been so profitable for two decades, is showing signs of strain. The satellite television provider DISH Network has not carried 16 Fox Sports regional networks for the last nine months. A new Chicago sports network is having trouble getting distribution. Comcast has been sued by a Colorado regional sports network.In other words, the balance of the sports television ecosystem was already being disrupted before the coronavirus pandemic shut down sports. “Now imagine you have pulled out the last piece of the Jenga puzzle, which is that sports are no longer on the air,” Moffett said. “The whole foundation, the linchpin that was keeping it together, is gone, and the Jenga tower collapses.”The first sign of that collapse in America comes from DAZN, the sports streaming service that mostly shows boxing and baseball highlights in the United States, but is a major rightsholder in some other countries. DAZN has told some leagues it will defer payments for suspended or canceled competitions, according to two people familiar with the negotiations. Since it doesn’t receive payments from distributors as traditional television networks do, DAZN is attempting to conserve its cash.“DAZN is a pure sport play — when sports stops, so do many parts of our business,” wrote Simon Denyer, the chief executive of DAZN, in an email to employees on Tuesday announcing furloughs. The news was first reported by the Sports Business Journal.Regional sports networks, along with teams and leagues, face the biggest threat from a prolonged shutdown of live action, according to Moody’s Investor Service. If consumers balk at keeping subscriptions to sports networks, it “may affect affiliate fees unless their networks are part of the basic tier of pay TV,” wrote Moody’s in a recent research comment.That is little help to television subscribers like Sanz.She said she bought a Roku and is considering completely abandoning cable in favor of streaming. She has also called other companies that provide services she subscribes to, just to see if they would offer any discounts. When she reached Adobe, which charges her $39.99 each month for its Creative Cloud suite, she was given three free months. A small reprieve maybe, but significant.