Spain Plans to Play Soccer Again … Very Carefully
By Tariq PanjaLONDON — Daily tests for coronavirus. Only two people in the gym at a time. Players dressing for practice at home.Those are just some of the protocols La Liga, the organizer of Spain’s top two soccer leagues, deems necessary to allow even practice to take place before games resume, with a new target date of sometime in June. In Spain, like almost every other country in the world, play has been suspended for weeks amid efforts to halt the spread of the disease.The guidelines are in a confidential 23-page document reviewed by The New York Times. They provide insight into the details of what is required to get major sporting competition restarted without compromising the health of athletes or the wider population.The measures being formulated appear more like those required for a medical facility than for a soccer team’s training ground. But the league appears to be leaving nothing to chance. As well as the ubiquitous odor of disinfectant and the sight of individuals in personal protective equipment, there will also be a strict list of people allowed at any one time and stringent protocols.The pursuit to get back on the field is driven by commercial reasons as much as sporting merit. La Liga’s president said calling off the season would amount to a financial catastrophe, which he estimated would cost teams in Spain’s top division as much as one billion euros (more than $1 billion).Spain has been one of the hardest hit countries during the crisis. As of Thursday, its more than 213,000 confirmed cases were the second-highest globally after the United States, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The number of deaths in Spain — more than 22,000 — are more than any country aside from the United States and Italy.With that in mind, the league is aiming to start playing games without spectators in June. To get there, it has consulted with experts to devise a monthlong training protocol divided into four stages. Two days before the regimen begins, all the players, coaches and any staff deemed necessary to have contact with them will be tested for both Covid-19 symptoms and immunity to the virus.The tests will continue throughout the month with players tested in their cars before being allowed to enter practice facilities. A positive test at any point would result in the player being sent home to isolate until they are deemed no longer contagious. Their teammates would also be sent home and tested again before being allowed to return.Taken as a whole, the guidelines show the tightrope sports competitions are treading as they plan a return in the age of social distancing. Everything has been designed to limit contact, something that will jar many athletes used to the daily ritual of being part of a collective.“The procedure drawn up by La Liga is based on the clubs being able to apply it in a confined manner in a setting that is closed off from the outside world, like a training ground or team hotel, in order to comply with the measures stipulated by the decree declaring the state of alarm,” the document says, referring to the strict restrictions imposed on the nation by the Spanish government on March 14.Players used to having an army of staff members catering to their every need will now have to get used to a more stripped down environment.In the first phase of the training program, they may encounter very few people. Players will be expected to arrive at the training ground at different intervals. They would be expected to be wearing protective gloves and masks until the moment they start to train. During this initial phase, only six players would be allowed on the practice field at any one time.Clubs are advised to design training drills that require the minimum amount of equipment possible, while a maximum of two players can be allowed in the gym at the same time, and the equipment must be disinfected after each use.Group training will only be permitted in a limited manner at first, with a maximum of eight players being permitted to train together. Those eight will not be able to mix with any of the other players, whether on the field or in the dining areas. For the final period of training, the players are expected to lodge at the team’s practice facility, which will be operated by a skeleton staff. For instance, only one cook, equipment aide and laundry attendant will be allowed on the site. The coach will be allowed to have a maximum of three assistants and three physiotherapists.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The austere, clinical nature of La Liga’s buildup to a return also extends to downtime. When not training, players must return to their rooms and not mix with any teammates. Those that choose to stay at home are advised to not go out at any time unless they are driving to the practice field, which must always be done in the same car.Medical officials from a number of La Liga teams had input in creating the protocol. It was prepared jointly by staff members from the league and officials from Real Sociedad, Grenada and Osasuna and reviewed by medical professionals from four other teams, including Atletico de Madrid and Sevilla.