Can Sports Help Heal a Country? Some Fans Don’t Buy the Emotional Pleas
By James WagnerFew things would make Pedro Urbaez happier than seeing the Mets play again.He was born and raised in Corona, the neighborhood adjacent to the Mets’ stadium. Some of his earliest memories are of sitting in the upper deck with his father or reading baseball encyclopedias he got from his dad. Now, 38, Urbaez is a member of a popular Mets fan club and watches about 20 games in person each season, nearly all of the rest on television.Yet with baseball and other major sports desperately seeking avenues for a return amid the coronavirus pandemic, Urbaez and other fans wonder if leagues are conflating their economic stakes with pleas full of emotion and nostalgia.Are big-time sports actually the healing force so many public officials and sports leaders purport them to be? And do their fleeting thrills provide necessary entertainment right now, justifying the risks posed by large gatherings?“I don’t think now is the time,” said Urbaez, who has seen firsthand the peril caused by the pandemic while working at a New York food rescue nonprofit. “We need other things to be healed, if you want to call it that, before we get to baseball.“We need to be able to lower the number of people in hospitals and morgues. How do we get people back to work? Those things are more important in the midst of how we can heal. I can’t heal if I’m worried when I’m going to eat. I can’t heal if I’m worried that I don’t have a job or somebody is sick.”Although the number of deaths has declined in some places, including New York, the United States remains in the firm grip of the virus, with new hot spots emerging and more than 85,000 people dead altogether. More than 36 million Americans have applied for unemployment benefits, and many businesses are in danger of folding. Scientists are still rushing to understand the spread of the virus, and testing is not yet available as widely as experts would like.As some states begin to loosen the reins on stay-at-home orders, professional sports leagues are also clamoring to return to work. They are multibillion-dollar enterprises, after all, with huge commitments, including television contracts and payrolls for hundreds of thousands of workers, not just millionaire players. Americans in general have expressed mixed feelings about the prospect of sports’ returning. An ESPN survey of people who identified themselves as sports fans found that just over half missed watching live competition on TV, and many said games should come back even if — as generally proposed by leagues seeking to play again — fans are forbidden to attend. Yet in a Seton Hall poll conducted last month, 70 percent of respondents said that if social distancing continued in the fall, the N.F.L. should protect the health of its players by not starting the season.But political leaders and sports figures, particularly in baseball, aren’t sticking to practical arguments in favor of playing. They have repeatedly turned to the nostalgia-infused rhetoric used after past tragedies — sometimes making direct connections. A sampling:“America needs baseball,” Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, said he told M.L.B. Commissioner Rob Manfred recently. “It’s a sign of getting back to normal.” President Trump and Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York have expressed similar sentiments.“Our players will be back, and we will be part of the recovery, the healing in this country,” Manfred said in late March.Yankees President Randy Levine called his players “patriots” for wanting to return to help the country. He added later: “Baseball has stepped up in troubled times to be a leader. We’re used to it.”Scott Boras, a baseball agent, portrayed the sport as a savior  in an op-ed in The New York Times last week. “Time and time again, baseball has helped our country heal,” he wrote, citing its role after the strike on Pearl Harbor, the 1989 earthquake in Northern California, the Boston Marathon bombing and the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks.Sports could indeed serve as a cue: In the same way that the N.B.A.’s decision on March 11 to shut down, which made it the first major American sports league to suspend operations, helped awaken the public to the severity of the coronavirus, the resumption of games could serve as a crucial sign of recovery.But what other leisure industry is sold as a healer? When the mayor of Las Vegas argued for the reopening of casinos, she did not say it would provide a distraction or help the public heal. She wanted to restart her city’s economic engine of tourism and gambling. Could other entertainment industries, such as film and television, make similar arguments?“Comedy is so important during these times,” said Zandy Hartig, 52, a sports fan from New York who lives in Los Angeles. Hartig, an actress whose on-screen credits include “Medical Police” and “Childrens Hospital,” has been unable to work because of the pandemic and worries about keeping her health insurance.“It’s the same thing with a really good drama,” she said. “When it’s good, you get taken to another world, and it’s inevitably better than the world right now.”Hartig believes sports can be similarly powerful. She remembers attending Yankees games in New York soon after 9/11 and being overwhelmed by the sense of community. She has watched grown men cry following a Knicks playoffs loss, and she said she would love to again spend time with her two sons at Los Angeles Clippers and Dodgers games.Yet Hartig understood why the teams and her own occupation have to be reined in.“We don’t have essential jobs, even though I kind of think sports and entertainment are on an emotional and psychological level,” she said. “It might be an addiction.”In some ways, sports have become a “mythical creature” romanticized in popular culture, said KJ Kearney, 36, a former college football player at South Carolina State University with a background in politics, who now works at an elementary school in Charleston, S.C.Kearney would love to be watching LeBron James in the N.B.A. playoffs for the Los Angeles Lakers right now. He understood the desire to be entertained and, for those going through hard times, to find an escape. “But there’s a difference between wanting to be entertained and claiming that that entertainment is somehow healing or closing up a fissure,” he said.That language, he said, should be reserved for more serious matters. To Kearney, an indelible home run by the Mets’ Mike Piazza in the first professional sporting event in New York after the 9/11 attacks was no more than a distraction. Healing, he said, would have required more difficult discussions about the United States’ foreign policy, preventing future attacks and caring for emergency workers and the families of victims.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“We need to do a better job of distinguishing the obvious from the important,” Kearney said. “The obvious is we’re bored and we would like to watch sports. But that’s not the important. The important is making sure everyone is safe. Otherwise, it’s going to end up like the plague of 1918 where like 20 million people die because of our inability or unwillingness to do what is necessary to contain this virus.”As much as Urbaez wants the Mets back, if only on TV, he said he could not support that in good conscience if it meant putting people in danger, including athletes and other team employees, or using resources needed by more essential workers.He said it bothered him to admit that the longer he had gone without baseball in his daily life the more he could get used to it. While he missed the Mets, Urbaez’s focus remained on the return to normalcy for society as a whole. “In the baseball and in the sports world, there’s millions and billions of dollars that could get lost, but so is everybody else?” he said, adding later: “We’re all losing. The idea that sports thinks it’ll be a good distraction, I don’t really believe it.