A Virtual HORSE Competition? B-O-R-I-N-G
A rather uneventful game of HORSE involving pro players, plus 100 straight volleys, baseball in Taiwan, and training for a Swedish soccer team.By Danielle AllentuckCurrent and former N.B.A. and W.N.B.A. players competed in a virtual game of HORSE Sunday night on ESPN. The result? An air ball.When the competition was announced last week, sports fans were ecstatic to have something — anything — even resembling live basketball to watch. That excitement faded quickly as the competition dragged on.The videos, filmed by the players with their own cameras, were blurry, shaky and oftentimes awkwardly lagged. It was sometimes difficult for the viewer to tell if the shots, taken on the players’ home courts, even went in. Sound quality was poor, and it was hard to understand the players’ commentary.Few competitors tried trick shots, even though the main goal of HORSE is to complete a shot so difficult your competitor can’t match it. Allie Quigley of the Chicago Sky was an exception — she even made a shot sitting down. Her opponent, Chris Paul of the Oklahoma Thunder, couldn’t match it.The semifinal will be played Thursday. Chauncey Billups will face off against Mike Conley, and Zach LaVine will play Quigley.Andy Murray and his wife, Kim, have a challenge for tennis players: can you complete 100 straight volleys?The two failed the first time, but made it on their second try. They posted the video on Twitter, encouraging players and fans to try it themselves.The tennis world responded. Professionals like Novak Djokovic and his wife, Jelena, tried the challenge, and then asked for another competition.“We’re here, we’re available,” Djokovic said. “We have all the time in the world. This is the funnest part of the day.”It was a great chance for the young to show off their skills, and for the old to show that they still have it. And don’t forget about the pets, who always find a way to be included.No partner? No problem. One fan did the challenge alone by tossing the ball back and forth between his racket. Other fans adapted the challenge by using their cellphones instead of a racket.Play ball! It’s opening day. Ah, the smell of freshly mown grass, the crack of ash on horsehide, the cries of the Cracker Jack sellers … sorry, we lost it there for a minute. Actually, the opening day to which we were referring is in Taiwan.Like basketball, baseball is back in Taiwan, where Covid-19 has been contained fairly successfully.The Uni Lions beat the Chinatrust Brothers on Sunday, 4-1, in 11 innings, and more games are scheduled Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.There were no fans in attendance, but President Tsai Ing-wen and her cat were pictured watching the game on television.Both the men’s and women’s soccer leagues in Taiwan also got underway over the weekend. VICTOR MATHERHammarby, a Swedish top-division soccer team, has resumed practicing. That would be exciting enough news for sports-starved fans, but making it all the more electrifying was the presence on Monday of the brilliant and colorful striker Zlatan Ibrahimovic.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Ibrahimovic gets attention wherever he goes. And his presence with Hammarby started eyebrows rising and tongues wagging because of supposed friction between Ibrahimovic and his current team, A.C. Milan, which he joined in December after two years with the Los Angeles Galaxy. Could Hammarby, in his home country, be a final stop for the 38-year-old Ibrahimovic?Hammarby’s training sessions are being kept below the national limit of 50 people gathering in one place, although the excitement of Ibrahimovic’s presence might make it hard to keep a lid on the attendance.“Zlatan has been home in Stockholm with his family during the break, and felt he wanted to touch the ball again,” Jesper Jansson, Hammarby’s director of football, told the team’s website. “Of course, we were in favor of it, so he was here today and trained.”German teams are the highest profile so far to begin practicing, as a handful of leagues around the world start to creak back to life.