Baseball Season Opens With a Dash of Imagination
By Dan BarryProfessional baseball greeted a new season this afternoon with an Opening Day game for the ages, an extra-inning masterpiece that vividly unfolded on the sun-dappled field of the imagination. The crack of the bat could almost be heard, the blur of white almost seen, the communal joy nearly felt.From the moment the first batter tipped his helmet — and a bird flew out — to the walk-off home run by a faltering pinch-hitter, this 11-inning affair redefined what constitutes a perfect game. No one cared about the outcome; the distraction was reward enough.Don’t misunderstand: This game between the New York Gothams and the Cincinnati Greens mattered, but in ineffable ways beyond the columns of wins and losses. It mattered so much that complaints about baseball’s slow pace yielded to the universal wish that this game would last forever.“I could’ve played into the night,” said the redeemed Gothams left fielder Sammy Sosa, who missed part of last season after sneezing so hard that he strained a ligament in his back. “I didn’t want this game to end.”It had been a difficult off-season, after all, the worst in memory. Beyond the usual challenges, including the vexing issue of performance-enhancing drugs, baseball struggled to address a cheating scandal serious enough to sully the legitimacy of a World Series championship.Yet these consequential baseball matters were instantly made trivial by unsettling developments far from any ballpark. Yes: a difficult off-season. Make that a horrific one.But on the open field of the collective mind, the sun played peekaboo with cottony clouds, the air suggested but did not demand a sweater, and the gates opened in welcome to a ballpark with infinite capacity.Fans presented their reasonably priced tickets and received in return a surprise gift: a vinyl record of the finest disco music of the late 1970s. These records — items of destructive mischief in another era — were packed with care and taken home for many nights of “Stayin’ Alive” enjoyment.The spectators sat shoulder-to-shoulder and reveled in concession-stand fare free of sushi and chardonnay. Only beer and soda, hot dogs and Cracker Jack.The pregame formalities were handled by a public-address announcer with the voice of a convivial god — a cross between Bob Sheppard and Vin Scully. He introduced Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York, who threw out the ceremonial first pitch, a straightforward strike.Then two celebrities met at the pitcher’s mound to sing the national anthem: the singer José Feliciano, who once sang the finest rendition at a baseball game, and the comedian Roseanne Barr, who once sang the worst.The two sang in pitch-perfect harmony. People wept.And the game began.The first batter, Greens right fielder Casey Stengel, seemed especially happy to be at a baseball game, perhaps because he had missed the final month of last season after a particularly intense Guitar Hero solo left him in traction.Stengel stepped into the batter’s box, then stepped out to acknowledge the cheers. He doffed his helmet — and a bird flew out and up and away. Some say it was a sparrow; others, a glorious dove.The antic delighted the crowd but tested the patience of the home-plate authority Pam Postema, the first woman to wear umpire blue at a regular-season major league game — at least on this conjured field. She ordered Stengel back into the batter’s box, where he promptly popped up on the first pitch from Gothams pitcher John Smoltz.The right-hander commenced to silence doubters who thought he would never recover from the injury he sustained last year while ironing his shirt. (He was wearing said shirt at the time of said ironing, it was said; he has consistently denied this account.) He kept batters off-balance with a devilish mix of pitches, including a curveball that seemed to strafe third base before finding home.But in the fourth inning, Greens first baseman Vic Wertz rocketed a line drive that sent Gothams center fielder Willie Mays racing to the wall, his back to the plate.Nobody in attendance could later articulate exactly what happened next. Somehow, Mays caught the ball over his head on a dead run. Somehow, he spun and rifled a throw back to the infield to hold the stunned runners at first and second, his hat flying, his torqued body flailing like a teetering top.The play shocked the ballpark into reverent silence. Then came an eruption of cheers and applause from the stands, both dugouts and all the players on the field, including the opposing runners on base. It was pure elation, springing from having witnessed, in microcosm, man overcoming challenge.The bipartisan bonhomie was briefly interrupted in the sixth inning when Gothams Manager Buddy Harrelson and Greens Manager Pete Rose came to blows — again — over a close play at second base. It was a kind of AARP-sponsored re-enactment of their infamous brawl as players in 1973, only this time no punch connected, and no dugout emptied.The home-plate umpire, Postema, did not exactly exert herself in separating the aged adversaries. After a brief timeout to allow them to catch their breaths, the two men walked off the field arm-in-arm — although their argument continued well after the game.“My fault entirely,” Harrelson later said. “I’m calling him tonight to say how sorry I am.”“Buddy’s wrong, again,” Rose answered. “This is on me, and I’ll be the one to apologize, goddamn it.”Meanwhile, Greens pitcher Hoyt Wilhelm was all but matching Smoltz in excellence, though with pitches that tangoed more than darted. He is a knuckleballer, after all, who showed no ill effects from his injurious encounter last year with a wild boar.Wilhelm twice ran into trouble, and twice was rescued by his shortstop, the preternaturally calm Derek Jeter. In the second inning, Jeter dived deep into the stands to catch a foul ball and end a Gothams rally. And in the eighth, he snagged an errant cutoff throw and flipped it to the catcher to nip a runner at home. The plays were all the more remarkable because Jeter made them seem routine.The game remained scoreless until the top of the 11th, when the Greens finally got to Smoltz. Left fielder Jimmy Piersall, who went on the injured list last year after crashing into a table during a nightmare about spiders, sent a hanging curve ball into the left-field seats.​Piersall celebrated what was the 100th home run of his career by moonwalking his way around the diamond. He even shook hands with the third-base coach as he shuffled backward toward the embrace of exuberant teammates.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.But the home team had one more chance.With two outs in the bottom of the 11th, right fielder Mike Davis walked. Harrelson, the Gothams’ manager, then made the ​surprising choice of the veteran Kirk Gibson to pinch-hit.Injuries to both of his legs had prevented Gibson from starting the game — injuries caused not by some freak accident, but by the demands of his profession. He all but hobbled to the plate, the bat in his hand more like a cane he was too proud to use.His inability to anchor himself became painfully evident as he barely fouled off the first two pitches of an ace reliever we do not need to name. Then he hit a weak dribbler down the first-base line that mercifully went foul, so lame was his attempt to beat it out.Ball one. Another foul. Ball two. Ball three. The ballpark was quiet as a church.Now, with the count full and fate in the offing, the reliever threw. And Gibson swung. More accurately, he lunged, all arms and chest and shoulders, his hopes extending beyond his physical limitations.Bat met ball. Ball rose into the twilight, up, up, and then down, down, to land beyond the right-field wall. In a time that seemed so improbable, it was said, the impossible had happened.