Looking for a Sport to Watch? It Won’t Be Easy
By Victor MatherIn Russian soccer, it was Sochi 2, Krasnodar 0. In Turkish basketball, Fenerbahce 84, Tofas 75. In women’s Australian rules football, Greater Western Sydney 26, Adelaide 21.These scores, which would ordinarily be buried in the blizzard of worldwide sporting results, stood out this weekend. Not because the games were particularly remarkable, but because they were played at all.All of the major leagues in the United States, plus golf, tennis and other sports have shut down because of the spread of the coronavirus. The top soccer and rugby leagues did the same in Europe. Just about all sports in China and Japan have been idle for weeks.The soccer slate for Sunday, normally chock-full of games from nations big and small, consisted of matches in only a handful of regions: South and Central America, Africa, Australia, Russia and some former Soviet nations, and some Asian countries that were not at the epicenter of the pandemic, like Vietnam and Singapore.The rest of the world was virtually sports free.Here is a look at the games and events that are still bring held. For now.While human sports have been shutting down, horse racing has proved to be surprisingly resilient, even in places like France and Britain, which are all but closed down.In New York, restaurants and schools were ordered closed, yet Aqueduct was open for horse racing without fan attendance this weekend, financed by bettors at home and at simulcast locations. On Monday, the New York Racing Association said the track would continue to offer live racing. There was also racing at Gulfstream in South Florida and Santa Anita in California. There were no fans, but jockeys, trainers and, of course, horses were all busy with their usual jobs. “Very strange,” jockey John Velazquez told The Miami Herald of racing at a nearly empty Gulfstream Park. “It’s a little bit sad.”Cheltenham in England ran its prestigious horse racing festival last week, and 250,000 fans showed up over the four days, down just 5 percent from last year. Spectators pressed eagerly against one another to cheer Al Boum Photo to a repeat victory in the Gold Cup, and Princess Anne and other members of the royal family were among them. With the conclusion of the festival, racing in Britain will now take place without fans at least through the end of March.And the mushers kept mushing at the Iditarod trail sled dog race in Alaska, which neared its finish. Because the race is nearly 1,000 miles, “they do a very good job of social distancing,” Heidi Hedberg, Alaska’s public health director, told The Washington Post.Dener Barbosa of Brazil won a Professional Bull Riders event in Duluth, Ga., held without spectators over the weekend.Ultimate Fighting Championship held its scheduled mixed martial arts card in Brasília on Saturday night without fans in attendance. The fights were shifted from the subscription service ESPN+ to ESPN, which understandably is eager for live programming.The National Collegiate Wrestling Association held its wrestling championships in Allen, Texas, for schools not part of the N.C.A.A. More than 600 athletes participated. “I think a lot of this is driven by fear,” the executive director, Jim Giunta, told The Dallas Morning News. “We’re going to do everything in our power to create an environment that’s more than safe for our athletes. But after we do everything we can do, we’re going to operate on faith rather than fear.”Premier League Darts took place last week in Liverpool as scheduled with the usual rowdy crowd enjoying their pints at communal tables. The next round was set for Newcastle on Thursday, but because of crowd gathering rules in the Netherlands, the final in Rotterdam was postponed until the fall.In snooker, Judd Trump won the Gibraltar Open on Sunday. Spectators were limited to 100, and no referees were used. The Tour Championship in Wales was still on, beginning on Tuesday, and the world championship was to follow.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Liga MX in Mexico was one of the most prominent soccer leagues in the world that was still in action, and played its games through Sunday. But the league announced a suspension of its season immediately afterward.An Olympic boxing qualifying event in London started on Saturday, with more than 300 fighters but no fans. “All of the teams have been told to adopt regular hand-washing,” organizers said. Then, on Monday, organizers changed their minds and suspended the event until May or June.