England Will Return to the Soccer Field. Scotland Won’t.
England is doing everything it can to get back on the field. Scotland threw in the towel. Plus, updates on the horse racing calendar, and hugs and a kiss on the soccer field.By Victor MatherEngland and Scotland have a long rivalry on and off sports fields. But ultimately, they are both part of Britain and the United Kingdom. So it may come as a surprise to see how differently they are approaching the return of soccer.England has been doing everything it can to restart its season. Players will return to training in small groups on Tuesday. No date for games is yet set, but organizers are eager to begin as soon as feasibly possible.But Scotland announced Monday that its season would not continue. Celtic F.C., which was leading the Premiership by 13 points with eight games remaining, was declared the champion for the ninth straight year.With such a big lead, Celtic was very likely to win even during a completed season. But the situation at the bottom of the league was more fluid. When play stopped, Hearts was in last place, the sole relegation spot, but trailed Hamilton by only 4 points, a margin that would have been very possible to close. Now they will be relegated without another ball being kicked.One reason for the discrepancy between England and Scotland’s plans is money. England has a huge TV deal — worth more than a billion dollars per year, domestically alone. If England failed to finish its season, it would have to give back a portion of the money, and even a portion is still a ton of cash.Scotland’s TV deal is much smaller, less than $20 million domestically, according to reports. But Scotland is getting a better deal next season, and no one wants to jeopardize that income. So calling it a season and moving on to a more lucrative future seemed to be the soundest move.Some teams in the Scottish leagues are not happy with the decision. Unsurprisingly, most teams’ opinions depend heavily on how they finished in the partially completed season.Celtic reacted Tuesday with a blizzard of retweets of congratulatory messages for winning the title.Hearts’ reaction was very different. “We have stated from the outset that we don’t believe it is right that any club should be unfairly penalized because of the Covid-19 pandemic,” the team said in a statement. “As previously intimated, the club has been taking legal advice throughout this process and are continuing to do so.”The other two nations in the U.K., Wales and Northern Ireland, with leagues even smaller than Scotland's, have not yet made decisions on whether to try to resume their seasons.For decades, the Preakness Stakes has been run exactly two weeks after the Kentucky Derby in May. Because of the coronavirus, that tradition has changed. The Preakness was rescheduled to Oct. 3, nearly one month after the Derby on Sept. 5.There has been a push for more time between the Triple Crown races for years, as it happens. Top horses ran sometimes as often as once a week in the 1930s and ’40s. But in recent times, the best horses will almost always wait at least a month between races. That has caused some trainers to complain that the two-week gap between the Derby and Preakness is an anachronism that makes winning both more difficult.The Belmont Stakes, which is run three weeks after the Preakness in normal times, has not yet been rescheduled. If it sticks to the usual gap, it would be held on Oct. 24. But that seems to be too close to the big season-ending event, the Breeders’ Cup, still planned as scheduled on Nov. 6 and 7 at Keeneland in Kentucky.The Triple Crown races will already be significantly different because they’re being run in the fall, as the 3-year-olds will be bigger and stronger than they would have been in the spring.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.When German soccer returned this weekend, there were strict rules in place: no spectators, copious Covid-19 testing and only solo celebrations.Most teams seemed to scrupulously follow the rules, which ran 50 pages long. But one German team, Hertha Berlin, went ahead and celebrated its 3-0 win over Hoffenheim conventionally, in defiance of social distancing rules. There were group hugs, and one player, Dedryck Boyata, even kissed his teammate Marko Grujic on the cheek.“We are passionate footballers, not robots,” said Vedad Ibisevic, who scored in the game.