First Woman Drafted in N.B.A. Avoids Coronavirus, but Not Its Frustrations
By Jeré LongmanBefore the coronavirus pandemic, the class of 1969 from tiny Union-Whitten High School in Iowa still met once a month. Its homecoming queen, Denise Rife, then known as Denise Long, once scored 111 points in a basketball game, and was the first woman drafted by an N.B.A. team.Rife, a retired pharmacist, turned 69 last week. She planned to drive from Rose Hill, Kan., where she lives outside Wichita, to celebrate her birthday with friends from her farmland roots in Iowa. The park now bears her name in Whitten, population 147, where she shoveled snow and then shot baskets for hours at a time.The pandemic meant the monthly reunion was canceled. Rife could not see her former coach, who once joked that he would marry her if she could get him to the state tournament. The coach is in a nursing home, and because of the pandemic, no one, not even his wife, is allowed to visit.Rife’s alma mater is on lockdown, too. At a nearby pharmacy, said Pam Paglia Norman, 69, one of Rife’s high school teammates, customers must wait outside until they are called inside to have prescriptions filled. Only credit cards are being accepted, so the cashier will not be exposed to germs carried on cash.“It’s freaky,” Paglia Norman said.Rife thought she might rent a car for a careful seven-hour drive home. But it may be just as well that she did not leave Kansas. Social distancing and staying home are parts of the new normal throughout the United States.Rife had replacement surgery for her left hip scheduled for April 8 in Wichita, Kan. The pounding and repetitive movements of basketball and years of standing for long pharmacy shifts had taken a toll. She already had her right hip and left knee replaced. A number of hospitals canceled elective surgery during the outbreak, but hers was still on as her birthday approached.“I’m going through so much pain, I don’t want to put it off,” she said in a series of telephone interviews.The orthopedic clinic said it would call if anything changed.Rife is a seminal basketball figure whose stardom came before the 1972 passage of Title IX, the gender-equity law that paved the way for girls and women to play more sports in greater numbers. Yet in the late 1960s, girls’ basketball in Iowa did not need a federal mandate to be more popular than boys’ basketball.Girls’ basketball was played six-on-six in those days. Three guards played defense on one side of the court, and three forwards played offense on the other side. Players were permitted two dribbles before shooting at baskets attached to half-moon backboards, which prompted a style of uncluttered movement, crisp passing and ravenous scoring.Even without a 3-point line, the 5-foot-11½ Rife scored 100 or more points three times with hook shots, set shots, turnaround jumpers and an underhand bank shot. The 1968 Iowa state championship game, available on YouTube, was a classic of the form. Rife scored 64 points (about her average), and her sharpshooting rival, Jeanette Olson, scored 76, as the Union-Whitten Cobras outlasted the undefeated Everly Cattlefeeders, 113-107, in overtime, before 15,000 fans at Veterans Memorial Auditorium in Des Moines.An article in Sports Illustrated in 1969 described Rife as looking “like a Grant Wood portrait — until she moves. Then she is all swiftness and grace.”A New York Times article from that era told of one player wearing a wig out of the locker room at the state tournament, trying to avoid reporters and frenzied fans. When small towns like Whitten emptied to follow their teams to Des Moines, the highway patrol kept watch. The television audience for the girls’ championship game drew as many as 3.5 million viewers in nine Midwestern states.“The greatest thing about six-on-six was that it didn’t get compared to the boys,” said Jean Berger, 61, the executive director of the Iowa Girls High School Athletic Union. “It wasn’t about what girls couldn’t do. It was its own game.”Basketball gave Rife confidence. She said her greatest thrill was the instant gratification of a ball going through a hoop and the crowd roaring its approval. On Saturdays in junior high, she sometimes dressed in her uniform seven hours before games and dribbled around the house, dreaming of becoming “the best girls’ basketball player that there ever was.”So devoted was she that she once soaked an injured ankle in a bucket of Epsom salt while at the movies. One summer, Rife and a cousin dragged a mattress to the park in Whitten, shooting and taking breaks until dawn approached, once calling their coach at 2 a.m. to let him know they were practicing. Another time, during the winter, Rife shot by herself when it was 11 degrees below zero and the ball felt like glass that might shatter.But she also became aware of pressure and expectations in high school and grew nervous on game days. Her neck broke out in red blotches in study hall and she listened to Dean Martin and Beatles records to calm herself. Her cousin and teammate, Cyndy Long, could break the tension, too, with funny poems she wrote and recited on the team bus or in the locker room.“She drank Pepto-Bismol before every game,” Long, 66, said. “So I tried to make her laugh.”In May 1969, Rife was in the principal’s office at Union-Whitten when a fellow student told her that she had been drafted.“Like the Army?” Rife said.No, the San Francisco Warriors of the N.B.A.“Do I have to go?” she asked.Franklin Mieuli, the Warriors’ owner at the time, drafted Rife in the 13th round. It was a publicity stunt, and the pick was nullified. But Mieuli formed a four-team women’s league in the Bay Area. For a season, the teams played a full game before Warriors games and an exhibition at halftime. Mieuli paid for Rife to attend the University of San Francisco, gave her $5,000 in expense money and leased a purple Jaguar for her to drive.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Johnny Carson, a fellow Iowan, invited Rife to be on the “The Tonight Show.” And she met Wilt Chamberlain who, seven years earlier, had scored 100 points in a game for the then-Philadelphia Warriors.As she recalled, Chamberlain asked, “Aren’t you the young lady who broke my record?”“Yes,” Rife replied, “but I didn’t mean to.”She became a born-again Christian and, in the early 1970s, toured Asia with an American basketball team, singing gospel songs at halftime. By then, however, her fame had grown complicated. While attending Northern Iowa, where she did not play basketball, she said she received a series of obscene phone calls. And in Marshalltown, Iowa, 20 miles from Whitten, an exotic dancer began using her name. When Rife approached her, she said the woman told her, “It’s increasing my business.”Eventually, Rife said, she paid little attention to basketball. It no longer held the same life-or-death urgency as it had while she played. Then, in 2018, the Warriors honored her at a game. Video of a pregame practice showed Rife being hugged by Kevin Durant and tossing an assist to Stephen Curry.Durant, now with the Brooklyn Nets, tested positive for the novel coronavirus. Rife said she was “saddened” by that and hoped he was OK.She has felt no symptoms herself, but has not escaped the pandemic. Last week, she got a call. Her hip replacement surgery had to be postponed for at least eight weeks. There was a shortage of protective equipment, she was told, for surgical staff members who were shuttling from hospital to hospital to help treat the pandemic.She understood, she said. This is an international crisis. But she is experiencing necrosis of her left hip. The blood supply has diminished. “When a person is in a lot of pain,” she said, “surgery doesn’t feel elective.”