Olympians Have Another Year to Prepare for Tokyo. It’s a Blessing and a Curse.
By Juliet Macur, Karen Crouse, Andrew Keh and Matthew FuttermanSteele Johnson, a diver who won a silver medal for the United States at the 2016 Rio Games, woke up Tuesday morning to texts from friends saying they were so sorry that the Summer Olympics had been postponed. They knew how hard it had been for Johnson, 23, and his wife, Hilary, to make ends meet as he pursued a gold medal in Tokyo.When he read the news, Johnson said, he felt it in the pit of his stomach.“We’ve had a very, very tough year financially,” he said. “I don’t know if I could keep up a lifestyle like this for another 12 to 15 months of just diving without getting a full-time job. It’s hard to think about making more sacrifices than we already have.”For days, athletes had been voicing concerns about the 2020 Tokyo Games, worrying that they were jeopardizing their health and the health of others if they continued training while many of their countries were locked down and restricting activity.In polls and surveys conducted over the weekend, athletes voted in overwhelming numbers in favor of a postponement.Yet when the news finally came, it was the ultimate mixed blessing: a lifeline for some and a new set of challenges that may be insurmountable because of financial, age or health issues for others.Like so many Olympians, Johnson, who has a degree in film and video studies from Purdue, lives on a tight budget that has no place for cuts. He and his wife don’t buy new clothes. At home in Indiana, their grocery bill must stay within $60 a week. He has worked nights as a driver for the food delivery service Grubhub. His wife is a wedding photographer.After he won a silver medal at the Rio Games, Johnson could not secure a sponsor. He receives a small stipend for being on the national team, but now will look for work that can carry him through to the new, unspecified date for the Games in 2021.“I’m just going to have to be creative,” he said. “I will do what I can to support my family and pay for our food and our dogs’ food, but it’s going to be a challenge.”Greg Meehan, the Stanford women’s swimming coach and the head of the U.S. women’s team, said the postponement left talented high school seniors with a tough choice: forgo college for another year and train exclusively for the Olympics or juggle training and the stresses of freshman year.“The timing was perfect: Go to the trials, hopefully make the Olympic team and then there’s that natural transition to college,” he said.Meehan’s swimmers include Katie Ledecky, a five-time Olympic gold medalist who took the longer, bigger-picture view in a message she posted on Twitter after the postponement was announced: “As we stand together to meet today’s challenges, we can dream about a wonderful Olympics in a beautiful country. Now is the time to support all those working to heal the sick and keep us all healthy.”Ledecky, 23, put off her senior year of college to focus on the Tokyo Games, and Meehan still doesn’t expect her back in the classroom until after the Olympics.“I don’t think this summer was going to be the best she was ever going to be,” Meehan said. “I think she’s going to be better next year.”Laurie Hernandez, a gymnast training in Costa Mesa, Calif., saw the postponement as exactly what she needed.She took two years off after winning a team gold medal and a silver in the balance beam at the Rio Games, working in entertainment. She competed on “Dancing With the Stars” — and won it — and also hosted “American Ninja Warrior Junior.”When she embarked on a comeback to the national team late last year, many people in the sport said it was too late. Before her gym was closed Thursday because of a statewide lockdown, she had been going there six days a week, at least five hours a day, training and rushing to fine-tune routines. She was doing everything and anything that could give her the best chance at making the Olympic team this summer.“Of course, I’d love more time to train,” she said last week.For other athletes, a postponement fit with what the doctor ordered.Kathleen Baker, 23, who won a gold and silver medal in swimming at the Rio Olympics, has Crohn’s disease, an autoimmune disorder that makes her especially vulnerable to the novel coronavirus.Training lately had descended into a search for open pools in San Diego, where she lives. “It’s been everyone fending for themselves, so it is not what the Olympics are all about,” Baker said recently.Sandi Morris, a pole-vaulter who won a silver medal in the 2016 Games, lost access to her regular training facility, and thus her finely tuned routine, when the University of Arkansas closed its doors this month in Fayetteville.This weekend, Morris — along with her two dogs and two birds — had planned to drive from Arkansas to Greenville, S.C., where she will rent a house near where her parents live to carry out a makeshift training plan at a pole-vaulting pit her father is building at a neighborhood soccer field.Morris said she was concerned how she would support herself through the pandemic and the postponement, with no opportunities for appearance fees and prize money on the horizon.“What do we do for the rest of the year?” Morris said. “We need to make money. But that’s what the rest of the world is facing right now.”Sheryl Shade, a longtime agent for Olympians and Olympic hopefuls, said her winter athletes began calling her after the postponement was announced, worried that their sponsorship dollars were at stake.“I told them they had to get in line,” Shade said. “Everybody’s concerned about the funding and the sponsors, who were pretty much finished with their campaigns that they are shipping to Japan. Now those sponsors might have to change them. Will there be enough money for everybody? It’s too early to tell.” For Allison Schmitt, a swimmer who was pursuing her fourth Olympic berth, the postponement of the Tokyo Games is the second deferment she has faced in a year. Schmitt, 29, already put on hold her pursuit of a master’s degree in social work at Arizona State after she spent the 2019 spring semester completing the first of her required counseling internships, an emotionally and physically draining experience that she blames in part for a poor showing in last summer’s world championships in South Korea.Tuesday’s announcement left Schmitt in a quandary. Does she pause her final year of school for 12 more months? Try to juggle the pursuit of her degree and another Olympic berth? Or does she get on with her life and leave her swimming aspirations somewhat unfulfilled?“The problem is, can we stretch this another year?” her coach, Bob Bowman, said. “I mean, I can. But I’m not sure she can.” Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.One glance at the Olympic rower Gevvie Stone’s calendar explains her predicament after the postponement. On Aug. 17, eight days after the Games were to end, she is expected to rejoin her residency in emergency medicine at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston after taking a two-year leave of absence.“There are two ways of looking at this,” said Stone, 34, who won a silver medal in the single scull at the 2016 Rio Games. “One, you can say, ‘I’ve already taken two years off, what’s another year?’ And two, it does seem like a very anticlimactic end to my career, considering I heard the postponement news on the radio halfway through a weight lifting session.”The Tokyo Games would have been her third and final Olympics. Now Stone is not sure her Olympic career is over, though continuing to train would require her to extend the leave of absence.The coronavirus has made the decision about her athletic future even harder. She has offered to return to her hospital immediately if the virus reaches a crisis level in Boston.“There’s definitely a feeling of guilt because I did take the Hippocratic oath,” Stone said, “and I take my responsibility very seriously.”For Ryan Lochte, the 2020 Olympics were supposed to be about redemption and salvaging his reputation after he made international headlines at the 2016 Olympics for falsely stating that he was robbed at gunpoint.“I was disappointed,” Lochte, 35, said of finding out the Olympics were postponed. “This was going to be my biggest Olympics. Especially with everything that has happened.” A 12-time Olympic medalist, Lochte was suspended from the sport for 10 months and dropped by most of his sponsors after the incident in Rio de Janeiro. Two years later, he was suspended for 14 months after posting a picture on his Instagram of himself receiving an infusion of a permitted substance through an unapproved method.He has since made an effort to turn his life around. Lochte married in 2017 and now has two children, and he returned to swimming full time two years ago, reuniting with his former coach, Gregg Troy, at the University of Florida.Lochte said that after the postponement announcement Troy told him: “‘Well, this is just a bump in the road. For you, you’ve had a lot of bumps in the past four years, and you’ve overcome them.”Then there is the Paralympian David Brown, who has become the fastest sprinter in his category and was on a track at the Olympic training center in Chula Vista, Calif., on Tuesday. Asked what he thought when he woke up to the news, Brown said, “Honestly, my reaction was: OK, what time is training today?”He said the Olympic and Paralympic Games were not the only reason for training and competing. “We’re training to better ourselves and to stay on top of the world. Just because the Games got postponed, this is not the time to say there’s nothing to race for.”