Another Tennis Leader Supports Idea of Merging Women’s and Men’s Tours
By Christopher ClareyAfter leaders of the men’s tennis tour, including Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, said they wanted to explore a merger with the women’s circuit, the head of the Women’s Tennis Association has made it clear that the feeling is mutual.“I’m not afraid of the full merger; I never have been,” Steve Simon, the chief executive of the WTA, said by telephone on Monday in his first extensive comments on the ATP’s interest. “I would certainly be the first to support it, because I think then you truly have the business and the strategic principles all aligned, which is what you need to do. Obviously it’s a long and winding road to get there, but I think it makes all the sense in the world.”Though the new chairman of the ATP expressed interest in a merger about two weeks ago, no formal or detailed discussions have begun. “We’re at the 10,000-foot level,” Simon said.Still, the tours, which have operated independently since the WTA was founded in 1973, are now in an unprecedented position. Never before have both tour chiefs and the biggest stars in the men’s game publicly supported considering such a merger.“Nope, which is why it never happened,” said Martina Navratilova, a 59-time Grand Slam champion, in a text message on Monday. “Nice to see the unity for a change.”Navratilova said she had long supported a merger, as has the WTA founder Billie Jean King.“But the ATP never stepped up,” Navratilova said. “It should happen, and maybe Covid-19 will make it happen sooner rather than later.”The coronavirus pandemic has shut down the professional tennis tours since mid-March. Wimbledon was canceled, and scores of other events were postponed through at least July 12.Both tours have had to reduce costs significantly. The ATP has furloughed or reduced hours for about one-third of its 100-plus employees, and the WTA, according to Simon, is cutting executive pay.Simon said that a merger was not a financial necessity for the women’s tour, though the ATP generates more revenue and has greater reserves.“This isn’t about trying to save the WTA,” he said. “We’ll be fine, but look, if we’re going to do the right business thing and we’re finally going to bring the sport together, I think the WTA would be very supportive of this concept.”Simon said tennis’s global nature would make restarting more challenging than it would be for leagues based largely in a single nation or region. But like Andrea Gaudenzi, the ATP chairman, Simon said the pandemic had created increased dialogue among tennis’s divided leadership and a fresh incentive to integrate, something King advocated before opting for what she called Plan B in 1973.“This is a unique time,” Simon said. “Crisis and challenges can sometimes provide opportunity as well.”Approval from both tours’ boards of directors would allow a merger to proceed, but because of existing commercial contracts, a full unification could take years to complete. “There’s going to be no shortage of accountants, tax attorneys, attorneys and everybody else that is involved with it,” Simon said. “It would take time, but conceptually it may not take as long. If you agree on the goal, you can usually get things done quicker.”Some, including the former men’s No. 1 Andy Murray, have expressed concern that the women might not be treated as equals in a merger because of the ATP’s greater economic resources and larger fan base. In the current model, there are complaints from the women’s tour about scheduling for show courts at some combined events with the men.Simon said he did not believe women would be second-class citizens in a merger. “It’s not an acquisition,” he said. “This isn’t about either tour taking territory.”A single merged tour, he said, could build larger audiences and have more commercial appeal, yielding bigger financial rewards for everyone.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“Right now we compete against ourselves as well as all the other leagues and entertainment properties,” Simon said. “We compete for fans, partners, sponsorships as well as broadcast and data, so the alignment allows you to aggregate assets.”Gaudenzi, who assumed his post in January, has backed pooling resources and even lobbied the four Grand Slam tournaments, the sport’s most prestigious events, to join forces with the tours. The Grand Slam tournaments all operate individually.Gaudenzi has described the commercial value of an alliance between the WTA and the ATP as “one plus one equals four,” and the worth of an alignment between the two tours and the Grand Slam events as “one plus one plus four equals 20.”“I like his math,” said Simon, who also said he agreed with it.But ultimately, the deciding factor will probably be whether today’s players, particularly those on the ATP Tour, support the concept. The men have quashed merger discussions in the past, and though Federer, Nadal and Murray have all expressed preliminary support, Murray has said he knows there is real opposition.He told CNN last week that some male players were resistant to equal prize money, even if they got a pay raise along the way.“Let’s say the first-round loser’s check for the men went from $8,000 to $10,000 and the women went from $6,000 to $10,000,” Murray said. “I spoke to some of the male players about that who were unhappy because the prize money was equal. And I said, ‘Well, would you rather there was no increase at all?’ And they said to me, ‘Yeah, actually.’”