Canada Will Have a Big Say on the Return of Major Sports in the U.S.
By Matthew FuttermanAs North America’s professional sports leagues try to figure out how to restart their games, they have to consider a factor that isn’t getting a lot of attention in the United States at the moment: Canada.The vast country north of the United States has been at the forefront of the sports world’s dramatic response to the Covid-19 pandemic, playing a key role in persuading the International Olympic Committee to postpone the Tokyo Games and, in some regions of the country, canceling all sporting events and other large gatherings through August.Canada’s austere approach to the pandemic and push for long-term social distancing measures stand in stark contrast to the approach of President Trump, who has spoken regularly with the leaders of sports leagues about getting games up and running again. Trump has included some of those leaders on his task force for restarting the U.S. economy, and he has said he wants athletic competition to begin again both for his own entertainment and as a symbol of life returning to normal.No such rush exists in Canada, the home of the reigning N.B.A. champions, the Toronto Raptors; 11 other franchises that are part of the United States’ five major sports leagues; and one M.L.B.-affiliated minor league baseball team.Steven Guilbeault, the minister of Canadian Heritage, who oversees all of Canada’s national sports institutions, including its Olympic committee, said for now much of the country is essentially operating under a prohibition on all large gatherings until the end of the summer, including sports gatherings.League representatives in the United States said they have open lines of communication with government officials in Canada, but that serious discussions about holding games in Canada have yet to occur.Guilbeault said the federal and provincial governments may consider some wiggle room for sports, perhaps allowing them to be played without crowds or with a reduced number of fans. But it’s far too early to predict anything, he said.Much of the responsibility lies with the leaders of provinces and territories. The federal government is able to mandate rule throughout the country only if it invokes the Emergencies Act, though the prime minister does control the border with the United States, giving Justin Trudeau the power to say who can come to Canada to conduct business — or play a game.Earlier this month Trudeau discussed with provincial premiers the possibility of invoking the act to coordinate a national response to Covid-19, but the premiers rejected the idea, preferring to set their own regional policies.As of Tuesday, Quebec and Ontario had about 31,000 confirmed Covid-19 cases, representing about 80 percent of all the cases in Canada.On April 10, Quebec’s ministry of tourism issued a directive canceling “festivals and other cultural and sporting gatherings, indoor and outdoor, for the summer period.”The directive applies to all sports at every level. Any sports federation or promoter who wishes to hold an event, whether it is a children’s soccer tournament or a Montreal Alouettes football game, will have to obtain the authorization of both the public health department and the ministry of education, said Alice Bergeron, the press secretary for Quebec’s tourism ministry. Organizations will have to demonstrate that the event can be held safely, she said.The Rogers Cup, women’s tennis tournament that had been scheduled for Aug. 7-16, in Montreal announced this month that the event would not take place this year. The men’s side of the tournament, scheduled for the same week in Toronto, has not been canceled, but over the weekend Premier Doug Ford of Ontario, which borders Quebec to the west, said normal life in the province would not return until scientists find a vaccine, which many experts say could take 12 to 18 months.“Until we find a vaccine, going back to normal means putting lives at risk,” Ford said during a news conference Saturday. “Letting our guard down means potentially exposing millions of people to the virus.”A national plan is especially important to the N.H.L., which has seven of its teams in five provinces, and to M.L.S., which has three teams in three provinces.A spokesman for the N.H.L. said the league plans to follow the advice of leading medical authorities and of local and federal officials in both the United States and Canada.A spokesman for M.L.S. said for now it was relying on its franchise owners in Canada to work with government officials.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Guilbeault said the provinces would most likely reject any federally imposed plan for returning to play and that necessity would probably dictate a coordinated response.“I think there will be an agreement among the provinces because it wouldn’t make sense for it to happen in any other way,” he said.All the leagues have considered trying to gather their personnel in one location and holding all games there, which could eliminate any Canadian obstacles, but none of those plans have yet proven workable.For M.L.S. and the N.B.A., the main conduit to government officials is Larry Tanenbaum, the chairman of Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment, which owns the Raptors, soccer’s Toronto F.C., and hockey’s Toronto Maple Leafs. Tanenbaum declined to comment.Richard Pound, a Canadian who is a longtime member of the International Olympic Committee, said the country’s cautious approach was to be expected and had been well-received by the public.“It’s been thought of as generally a good sign to the community that the governments are taking all this stuff seriously,” Pound said. “The prohibitions will be easier to lift if things go better than expected,” Pound said.