N.F.L. Changes Draft to TV-Only Event
By Ken BelsonThe N.F.L. has canceled plans to hold its draft publicly in Las Vegas and will conduct the three-day event in front of a television audience only, the latest sports-schedule change due to restrictions designed to combat the spread of the coronavirus.The draft will take place April 23-25, as originally planned. “The N.F.L. is exploring innovative options for how the process will be conducted and will provide that information as it becomes available,” the league said in a statement. “Public N.F.L. draft events in Las Vegas next month will not take place.”The move came amid mounting skepticism that the N.F.L. would be able to host an event expected to draw tens of thousands of fans to the Strip in Las Vegas, even as nearly every other sports league and organization had shut down operations.The draft, and the spectacle of first-round draft picks becoming newly minted millionaires on national television and in front of throngs of fans, has become one of the N.F.L.’s marquee events. Only the Super Bowl outranks it on the league’s calendar, and the live audience adds to the draft’s appeal — with N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell hugging top picks as fans cheer or boo both the commissioner and their favorite team’s decisions.The N.F.L. has encouraged the frenzy and also tried to monetize it. This year’s version was expected to be the largest ever, hosted by the Las Vegas Raiders, who are scheduled to open a $1.9 billion stadium this season, playing their first games in Nevada in September after moving from Oakland, Calif.But new guidance announced on Sunday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — limiting gatherings to 50 people for the next eight weeks — made holding the draft with fans in attendance nearly impossible.Goodell said the decision to cancel the live-audience element was made “in consideration of current information related to Covid-19 and guidance from medical experts such as the C.D.C., and in coordination with public authorities in Nevada and the City of Las Vegas.”The Raiders’ owner, Mark Davis, expressed support for the decision in a statement. “Health and safety has always been our top priority, so despite it being a major disappointment, this was the right decision,” he said.Last week, the league canceled its annual meetings with owners, general managers and coaches that were set to be held at the end of this month in Palm Beach, Fla., and clubs have eliminated nonessential travel, complicating the evaluations of free agents and potential draft picks.Still, the N.F.L. waited until Monday to call off public events at the draft and faced growing criticism that it did not fully grasp the gravity of the global pandemic.The C.D.C.’s new recommendations coincided with an announcement that MGM Resorts International, which operates some of the largest and most famous casinos and hotels in Las Vegas, would shut down until further notice. The draft was going to be held at some MGM properties, including the Bellagio Hotel and Casino, where a red-carpet walk by the top prospects was to take place on a stage in the famed fountains out front.Also on Sunday, Wynn Resorts, another prominent casino operator in Las Vegas, said that it would close properties in the city for two weeks.In recent years, the N.F.L. has increased the size and scale of the draft. For decades, it was held in Midtown Manhattan at Radio City Music Hall, with a short red-carpet event for high-profile players arriving on the first night. The league has moved the draft to Chicago, Philadelphia, Dallas and Nashville since then, adding ancillary events that have created festival-like settings.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Three networks — ESPN, the NFL Network and Fox Sports — now broadcast the proceedings, and more than 2,000 news media passes are issued in some years.This year’s event was supposed to be even more extravagant, partly because it coincides with the arrival of a new team in Las Vegas, and partly because of the city’s reputation for glitz and partying.The N.F.L. has ways of re-creating the draft as a made-for-television event, including using the N.F.L. Network studios. Instead of gathering in one location, the potential top picks could appear live via remote camera.