Sports Leagues Bar Fans and Cancel Games Amid Coronavirus Outbreak
By Sopan Deb, Scott Cacciola and Marc SteinA steady trickle of cancellations and other disruptions in the sports world caused by the coronavirus outbreak erupted into an avalanche on Wednesday, with the N.B.A. abruptly suspending its season and the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament and other events barring most spectators. A major tennis tournament was also in doubt.The N.B.A. acted after a player for the Utah Jazz, who had been listed as not playing, tested positive for the coronavirus, causing a moment of confusion before tip-off of a game against the Oklahoma City Thunder. The game was called off and the N.B.A. said the season would go on hiatus indefinitely.Earlier, the Golden State Warriors had become the first N.B.A. team to bar fans from games because of the coronavirus pandemic, announcing that it would close the doors to spectators for Thursday’s game against the Nets at Chase Center in San Francisco. The move foreshadowed sweeping changes across sports as public officials pressured teams to bar fans to help limit the spread of the virus.At least 1,190 people in 41 states and Washington, D.C., have tested positive for the coronavirus, according to a New York Times database, and at least 37 patients with the virus have died. A majority of the cases were in Washington State, California and New York.In parts of Washington State and California, large gatherings were restricted entirely. In states like Ohio, the authorities said similar orders were on the way. And the governing body of men’s tennis was in discussions about suspending tour events, including the Miami Open, a major tournament, for six weeks, according to three people briefed on the discussions who were not authorized to speak about them publicly.In Major League Baseball, the Seattle Mariners announced that they were working with the league to find alternative arrangements for home games at the end of March. The N.H.L.’s Columbus Blue Jackets said they would restrict attendance after the governor of Ohio announced that a ban on large gatherings was coming.Before the N.B.A.’s suspended season, the biggest move had come from the N.C.A.A., which barred all but a limited gathering of family members and essential staff members at the men’s and women’s basketball championship tournaments set to begin next week.The N.B.A.’s team owners held a conference call on Wednesday to decide what to do about their games, with the start of the playoffs just over a month away. The owners, according to a source familiar with the call, leaned toward playing in empty arenas for the rest of the season, but nothing was decided Wednesday night until news arrived that the Utah Jazz player had contracted the virus.On Wednesday, after San Francisco moved to ban gatherings of more than 1,000 people for at least two weeks, the Warriors announced that Thursday’s home game against the Nets would be played without spectators, and that all other events at the arena would be canceled or postponed through March 21.The San Francisco Giants, who play at Oracle Park, said in a statement that they would cancel their only event at the stadium during that city’s two-week ban on public gatherings — a March 24 exhibition against the Oakland Athletics.Santa Clara County, where the N.H.L.’s San Jose Sharks and M.L.S.’s San Jose Earthquakes play, announced a ban earlier in the week on gatherings of more than 1,000 people. The N.H.L. said in a statement, after the N.B.A. suspended its season, that it was evaluating its own plans for the season. Earlier, the league said it was working with the Sharks “to determine an appropriate course of action for home games through the end of the month.”In Washington State, Gov. Jay Inslee banned gatherings of more than 250 in multiple counties, including King County, which encompasses T-Mobile Park, the home stadium of the Seattle Mariners, and CenturyLink Field, where the Seattle Sounders FC of the M.L.S. play.The Sounders said their March 21 match against FC Dallas, which was to take place at CenturyLink Field, would be postponed.While many events in different industries have been canceled or changed because of the health crisis, attention sharply shifted to the sports world on Wednesday after Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, put the sports leagues on notice in an appearance before lawmakers.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“We would recommend that there not be large crowds,” Dr. Fauci said. “If that means not having any people in the audience when the N.B.A. plays, so be it. But as a public health official, anything that has large crowds is something that would give a risk to spread.”Still, the N.B.A. had seemed determined all day to carry on in some capacity.In Washington, D.C., despite a recommendation from the Department of Health that large gatherings be postponed or canceled, Monumental Sports and Entertainment, the ownership group of the Washington Wizards and the N.H.L.’s Washington Capitals, said its home games would be played as scheduled “at the current direction” of both leagues.“Should they update their guidance, we will update the public accordingly,” the ownership group said in a statement.Likewise, a spokesperson for Madison Square Garden, which owns the N.B.A.’s Knicks and the N.H.L.’s Rangers, said, “The remainder of our calendar is moving forward as scheduled.”The N.B.A. and the N.H.L. could face the most direct immediate financial hit of not playing. The M.L.B. season is not slated to begin until the end of March, and N.F.L. players are in the middle of their off-season, though the draft is slated to begin on April 23 in Las Vegas. The W.N.B.A. draft is on April 17, and the season begins May 15.“It’s a developing story,” Rick Welts, the president and chief operating officer of the Warriors, said before the league’s suspension. “We don’t know how it’s going to end.”