Paris Installs a Curfew on Outdoor Sports
Plus: Could sporting events be held on islands without fans? The National Rugby League in Australia, the Big3 and the U.F.C. are considering it.By Victor MatherLike many cities, Paris has lost a little bit of its magic during the coronavirus lockdown, with cafes, theaters and shops closed.And now you can’t even run there, at least for much of the day. All outdoor sports, including running, have been banned from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. Officials hope that by pushing people to exercise in the less busy hours they will cut down on social interaction.Mayor Anne Hidalgo told Franceinfo that she did not want to ban jogging, only limit it to “times when there will be fewer people on the street.” She continued, “During the day, you have people who do their shopping — and that’s normal, because you have to eat — and you have people who go to work.”Even cycling has been halted in France, but professionals are asking for a waiver, saying that their livelihoods are at stake.“Even if, for some, a cyclist is not an important profession to make society work, the fact remains that we are employees,” said Pascal Chanteur, president of the National Union of Professional Cyclists. “The Minister of Labor said that we had to go back to work if we could not do telework. And we could not resume? We would like to be able to exercise our profession like other employees.”France has been hit particularly hard by the virus. After 8,000 deaths, its health minister said on Tuesday that it was “still in a worsening phase.”The National Rugby League in Australia managed to get through just two games before the virus shut the sport down. But the league is considering an innovative way to get the season rolling again.It plans to pack up the entire league — teams, players and officials — and ship it to a resort, perhaps on Moreton Island, off the coast of Brisbane. There, games could be played safely distanced from the rest of the country.“We can sleep about 1,500 people,” David James, manager of Tangalooma Island Resort on Moreton, told Fox Sports. “We can isolate the place. We can lock it down.”The plan echoes a scheme by the Big3, the American three-on-three basketball league, to play its games in a quarantined area. That league planned to go a step further, having the players live in a house together for a “Big Brother”-style reality show.And speaking of islands, Dana White, president of the Ultimate Fighting Championship, said his organization’s fight cards might soon be held on one, too.“I’m a day or two away from securing a private island,” he told TMZ. “We’re getting the infrastructure put in now.” He said fights held there would primarily be for international fighters who could not get into the United States.There would be no fans, and steps would be taken to assure the health of fighters, referees and production people, he said.White said he was still not ready to reveal the location for U.F.C. 249, scheduled for April 18.There is, in fact, a golf tournament underway in the United States.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The perhaps aptly named Outlaw Tour, a minor league circuit, is holding an event this week in Scottsdale, Ariz., where golf courses are open after being deemed essential businesses.The mostly American, mostly unknown field includes Alex Cejka, a German who won on the PGA Tour in 2015.Players are keeping a distance from one another, and no one touches the flags or rakes.In Europe, some darts players have found an innovative way to compete at home. In the Icons of Darts Live League, players, including the former world champion Raymond van Barneveld, throw at boards in their houses and film it with a webcam.That event is available to watch, streamed on gambling sites. Which brings us to the reason that many of these sports are still pushing on: a hunger for betting action.Besides darts and outlaw golf, the betting site Ladbrokes on Tuesday was happy to take money on table tennis from Russia, Ukraine and Czech Republic (stay on your side of the table, please), and something called the Kung volleyball 3x3 amateur men’s event, where Malaysia and Indonesia seemed to be the favorites.