N.B.A. Opens for Practice, but Few Show Up
By Marc SteinThe Cleveland Cavaliers and the Portland Trail Blazers were the only clubs to unlock their practice facilities Friday, reflecting the cautious approach many franchises and players adopted on the first day that roughly half of the N.B.A.’s 30 teams had clearance to reopen after a shutdown of nearly two months.“It was wonderful,” said Cleveland’s Larry Nance Jr., who spent roughly 90 minutes lifting weights and shooting while his teammates Kevin Love, Cedi Osman and Ante Zizic each worked at separate baskets.“It was more for mental health than physical, to be honest with you,” Nance said in a telephone interview.Then on Friday night, N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver joined a conference call at the invitation of Michele Roberts, the executive director of the National Basketball Players Association, and fielded questions from players. Among Silver’s revelations, according to two people on the call who were not authorized to discuss the details publicly, was a willingness to go beyond June 1 before deciding the fate of the 2019-20 season and his contention that the best chance of completing the season with a representative postseason would most likely require playing in just one or two centralized locations.Orlando, Fla., and Las Vegas, often mentioned as possibilities, were confirmed on the call as prime contenders.The openings in Cleveland and Portland were the first since the league office confirmed to teams earlier this week that they could open facilities for at most four players at any time — but only in states where shelter-in-place restrictions had been eased, such as Florida, Georgia and Texas.Several teams have indicated that they will wait until at least next week, because of the N.B.A.’s considerable restrictions and a widespread inability to test facility entrants for the coronavirus.Numerous league and team officials have stressed that the reopening of practice facilities is mostly a way to give players an outlet to shoot again, as well as to lift spirits during the sudden and lengthy interruption to the season, rather than an indication that a resumption to the season is looming. Many players have had no access to a basket since the league suspended the season on March 11 because of the pandemic.The Denver Nuggets had intended to join Cleveland and Portland in opening their doors Friday, but a team spokesman said no Nuggets players planned to use the facility to work out until at least Monday.The Orlando Magic, who also could have opened Friday, disclosed that they had received written authorization from the Orange County Department of Health, as well as special approval from the N.B.A., to test facility entrants for the coronavirus starting next week, because there is robust testing in their area.The league initially instructed teams not to test asymptomatic players and staff members, calling it “inappropriate in the current public health environment” given the scarcity of testing kits in much of the country. The N.B.A. absorbed considerable criticism in March when the full rosters of the Nets and the Los Angeles Lakers were tested.The league has since said it will allow broader testing in places like Orlando, where local health officials confirm that ample testing is available.“We have been assured we are not taking any tests from health care workers, first responders or anyone, whether they are experiencing symptoms or asymptomatic,” a Magic spokesman said.Some players, such as Portland’s CJ McCollum, have made it clear that a willingness to return to N.B.A. practice facilities now is not universal. But McCollum, a players association vice president, told Yahoo Sports this week that he planned to go to the Blazers’ practice facility on Saturday.“I am worried like the rest of the world, but I like that it is optional and I’m pleased with the caution, structure and measures the Blazers organization has put in place to ensure the safest environment possible for all parties involved,” McCollum said.Nance, of the Cavaliers, submitted to a temperature and symptoms check before his workout Friday; league rules say anyone with a temperature above 99.1 degrees must be denied entry.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Nance’s return was notable because he has Crohn’s disease, an inflammatory bowel disease that is typically treated with immunosuppressive medication. This can make people with Crohn’s more vulnerable to infections, but Nance said he was confident about his medication.“They did a really good job of making sure we all felt great about being there,” Nance said of the Cavaliers. “They could make it at 4 in the morning and I would be there.”On April 27, N.B.A. teams received a 14-page memo detailing protocols to sanitize their facilities and encourage up to 12 feet of social distancing during workouts. Head coaches, front-row assistants and front-office personnel can’t attend or watch workouts, and each team can have only four staff members (wearing masks and gloves) in its building at any time.The Toronto Raptors announced even stricter measures, saying they will limit entry to just one player and one coach at any time when they open Monday.Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks, said in multiple interviews this week that the Mavericks would not open even though Texas was one of the first states to ease stay-at-home orders. Cuban maintained that “the risk is not worth the reward” for teams that, unlike Orlando, are not able to administer coronavirus tests to those entering facilities.