How a Band of Australians Made Belarus Soccer an Internet Smash
By Jack WilliamsIt has been a strange chain of events, the small group of soccer fans admits. One minute, the fans were searching for live sports to watch on television during the pandemic. The next, they found themselves building a passionate, worldwide following for a small-town Eastern European soccer team and, briefly, even trying to save it from financial ruin.It all started as a one-day lark in March, when Shane Robinson, 28, of Adelaide, Australia, began a conversation with friends about how they could fill the void when their local soccer team, Adelaide United, and the Australian soccer league — like most of the world’s other leagues — shut down as the coronavirus spread.With options like England’s Premier League and Italy’s Serie A similarly unavailable as a substitute, one of Robinson’s friends discovered that there were still some professional games being played. They just happened to be in Belarus.With a watch party out of the question because of social distancing restrictions, Robinson and about 25 friends searched for a Belarusian Premier League game that they could all watch remotely. One member of the group discovered that through a betting website, they could livestream the season opener between S.F.C. Slutsk (pronounced Slootsk) and Slavia Mozyr.So on a weekend in late March, they logged in. And they couldn’t believe what they found.“It was ridiculous,” Robinson said of the March 22 game, a 3-1 Slutsk victory in which five penalties were awarded. “It was nothing like I’d ever seen before. Right away, we were thinking: Surely this can’t happen every week. But it’s not been far off.”Furloughed from his job, Robinson spent the Monday after Slutsk’s victory creating a Facebook group that he envisioned as a means of encouraging fellow Australians to watch the team’s matches during the A-League’s hiatus. Hoping that the group, F.K. Slutsk Worldwide — a mistranslation of the club’s official name — would attract around 100 members, Robinson soon discovered that by sending the page to various A-League supporters groups, he had tapped into a sports-starved reserve of allies.“By Friday,” he said, “we had more than 1,000 people.”By the time Slutsk played its second game, against Dynamo Brest, hundreds of Australians were tuning in online to watch. English-speaking Slutsk fans in Belarus quickly discovered the group, too, and it was this perfect opportunity — internet connections, Zoom chats, livestreams and a desperate need for any sporting interaction — that has given a strapped Belarusian team with only a 2,000-seat stadium and serious financial problems a nascent worldwide following.From its roots in Australia, and then New Zealand and Indonesia, the Facebook group soon attracted members from across Europe, North America, South America and Africa. An English fan modified his St. George’s flag with the phrase “Slutsk Til We Die,” and in Burkina Faso, 30-year-old Abraham Golghota rejoiced at finally finding an outlet to discuss the relative talents of three Burkinabe players on Slutsk’s roster.“The Slutsk page just popped up on my page, and it was a name that stuck out,” said John Malone, 40, a Scot who has since watched four or five live games while he waits out the Scottish league’s suspension. “It’s a good laugh, talking to other football fans from around the world.”Soon, Robinson, the page’s founder, had opened a dialogue with the club itself.“After the second round it became clear that something needs to be done with this wave of popularity,” said Vitali Bunos, the Slutsk chairman. “Otherwise, we could simply lose these people.”The club set up a small task force and appointed a soccer writer, Yahor Khavanski, to act as a go-between for the team and the new supporters group. And representatives also began opening up to Robinson and others about the club’s dire financial prospects.“Someone basically said that they are short of money and that they are not even sure that the club will make it through the season,” Robinson said. “So we’ve started thinking of a couple of ways to help.”Initially, the supporters group and the club discussed selling merchandise to the new fans, but Covid-19 risks made it implausible. When the club then set up a crowdfunding page, supporters found that technological glitches and issues with currency exchanges hampered donations.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Eventually, Robinson settled on a GoFundMe page, which he hoped might raise around $25,000 to purchase sign boards around the team’s stadium.To date, the supporters group has raised only a small portion of what it had intended. More promisingly, Robinson said, he hoped the global attention the club was receiving might attract a sponsor willing to assist the team with its needs. (Recently, a betting company purchased a season’s worth of signage boards at the stadium after one of its communications executives came across the Facebook group.)Ahead of a home game last month, Robinson and his fellow global Slutsk fans — the Facebook community they have created now has more than 6,500 followers — were informed that they would not need to purchase sponsorship boards to have a presence at the team’s stadium after all. “They basically said, ‘Make sure you try and watch the game tomorrow; we’ve got a surprise for you,’” Robinson said.