Half the World Is on Lockdown. For Sports? More Like 99 Percent.
What follows is the sum total of sporting events being held on our planet. Plus, a really fast cyclist on Zwift.By Victor MatherAs the host of the 2020, we mean the 2021, Summer Games, Japan has drawn an outsize share of attention during the coronavirus pandemic. While it did shut down some events as early as February, and closed schools in March, it was slower to adopt some other mitigation efforts like working from home and social distancing, in part because its infection rates seemed low.But after the Olympics were postponed a year by the International Olympic Committee, Japan seemed to begin to catch up with many other countries. But in sports, it is still sometimes taking half-measures.The most recent elite sumo tournament, or basho, was held as scheduled March 10-22 in Osaka, although without spectators and without the traditional offering of a ladle of water from a winning wrestler to the next one up. (The winner of the basho was Hakuho, who collected his record 44th win.)On Friday, the May and July tournaments were postponed, but only by two weeks. That delay, at least in the case of the May basho, seems unlikely to push the event into a safe period.Sumo is Japan’s national sport, and the elite tournaments have been held six times a year uninterrupted since 1958. At least one basho has been held every year since 1909, including during World War II and the Allied occupation.President Trump attended the May tournament last year and presented a trophy inside the ring, where women are not permitted.Perhaps optimistically, Japan’s top baseball league had been planning to return on April 24 and the top soccer league on May 9. On Friday, both said they would postpone even further, probably until at least the end of May.Thomas De Gendt was just trying to play on Zwift, the game in which players on stationary bicycles can roll around or race in virtual worlds.Then he was suddenly reduced to a lower speed. The reason? He was going so fast that the game suspected that his device was faulty, or perhaps that he was cheating.But maybe his high rate of speed was not so surprising. De Gendt is a professional cyclist from Belgium who has won two stages of the Tour de France.“On a climb, I just had the numbers ​​that I more or less push in a race,” he told Het Nieuwsblad, a Belgian newspaper. “Suddenly I was blocked and neutralized by the game.”He added: “The numbers weren’t so special, though. For a while, 500 to 550 watts. As a cycling tourist, it may be unrealistically high, but for us as pros it is more or less normal if you want to win a race.”So the next time you get walloped in a sports video game, just tell your friends a true professional beat you. Surely.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.International sports score services like FlashScore are typically stuffed full of results in dozens of sports in hundreds of countries, especially on a weekend.So looking at FlashScore for this Saturday is a forlorn experience. What follows is the sum total of sporting events being held on our planet:Soccer from Belarus, Nicaragua and Burundi, which seem to be the three countries left playing league competition, plus a couple of Swedish friendlies.More Belarusian action in volleyball, handball and futsal (indoor soccer). Russian table tennis and “short hockey,” a game with 10-minute periods. Basketball from Taiwan and Tajikistan.And a decent range of e-sports, which of course are especially well-suited to social distancing.