Why Are Some People So Much More Infectious Than Others?
By Gina KolataAs the coronavirus tears through the country, scientists are asking: Are some people more infectious than others? Are there superspreaders, people who seem to just spew out virus, making them especially likely to infect others?It seems that the answer is yes. There do seem to be superspreaders, a loosely defined term for people who infect a disproportionate number of others, whether as a consequence of genetics, social habits or simply being in the wrong place at the wrong time.But those virus carriers at the heart of what are being called superspreading events can drive and have driven epidemics, researchers say, making it crucial to figure out ways to identify spreading events or to prevent situations, like crowded rooms, where superspreading can occur.Just as important are those at the other end of the spectrum — people who are infected but unlikely to spread the infection.Distinguishing between those who are more infectious and those less infectious could make an enormous difference in the ease and speed with which an outbreak is contained, said Jon Zelner, an epidemiologist at the University of Michigan. If the infected person is a superspreader, contact tracing is especially important. But if the infected person is the opposite of a superspreader, someone who for whatever reason does not transmit the virus, contact tracing can be a wasted effort.“The tricky part is that we don’t necessarily know who those people are,” Dr. Zelner said.Two factors are at play, said Martina Morris, emeritus professor of statistics and sociology at the University of Washington.“There has to be a link between people in order to transmit an infection,” she said. But, she added, a link “is necessary but not sufficient.” The second factor is how infectious a person is. “We almost never have independent data on those two things,” Dr. Morris said.She pointed out that it can be easy to misattribute multiple infections to an individual — possibly exposing the person to public attack — when the spread has nothing to do with the person’s infectiousness.“If you are the first person in a crowded room to get infected and if this is an easily spread disease, you will look like a superspreader,” she said. “Anyone in that room could have had the same impact. You were just the first in line.”Yet there do seem to be situations in which a few individuals spark large outbreaks. With Covid-19, it is not yet known whether those highly infectious people include individuals with silent infections who do not realize they are sick, said Dr. Thomas Frieden, former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and chief executive at Resolve to Save Lives, an initiative of Vital Strategies. More likely, he adds, superspreading events may involve people with symptoms that linger but who are not sick enough to stay home.Or they could involve infected people who shed an unusual amount of virus — a poorly studied factor that might be due to variations in the amount of virus in the aerosol droplets from a patient’s cough or the amount of infectious virus in feces, for example.No matter what the cause, public health measures, like avoiding crowds, and what Dr. Frieden calls cough hygiene, can prevent a superspreading event, he said.Medical history is replete with stories of superspreading in outbreaks of parasitic disease, tuberculosis, measles and other illness.There is Mary Mallon, a cook better known as Typhoid Mary, who spread typhoid fever to more than 50 people in the early years of the twentieth century. She herself was not ill but was asymptomatic — silently infected with typhoid.Superspreading also played important roles in outbreaks of two other coronaviruses, SARS and MERS.“The MERS-CoV outbreak in South Korea was driven primarily by three infected individuals, and approximately 75 percent of cases can be traced back to three superspreaders who have each infected a disproportionately high number of contacts,” wrote George F. Gao, an immunologist and virologist at the Chinese Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Beijing, in a recent paper.The outbreak in South Korea began in 2015 when a 68-year-old man became infected with MERS during travel to the Middle East. He returned to South Korea where he directly infected 29 people, two of whom infected 106 people. The total number of cases in South Korea at that time was 166 — that superspreading event accounted for most of the outbreak.In 2003 during the SARS outbreak, the first patient in Hong Kong appears to have infected at least 125 others. Other superspreading events involved 180 people in a housing complex in Hong Kong and another 22 people on a jet from Hong Kong to Beijing.In the Ebola outbreak in Africa between 2014 and 2016, 61 percent of infections were traced to just 3 percent of infected people.Superspreading also appears to have driven outbreaks of the new coronavirus.One event occurred at the end of February when 175 Biogen executives gathered for a conference at the Boston Marriott Long Wharf Hotel. At least one was infected with the coronavirus. Two weeks later, seventy five percent of the 108 Massachusetts residents infected with the virus were associated with Biogen. The infections rippled out from there, to other states and other Massachusetts residents.“Why at that conference?” asked Dr. Eric Topol, director of the Scripps research translational institute in San Diego. “At the time there were so many conferences — it was before social distancing. Something was going on there.”Then there was the March 12 birthday party in Westport, Conn. About 50 people attended. Half ended up infected. The cluster of cases expanded so fast health officials gave up contact tracing.At a funeral on Feb. 29 in Albany, Ga., someone unwittingly spread the virus among the 200 mourners. At Illinois’s current hot spot, the Cook County jail, at least 400 are known to be infected.At the other end of the bell curve of infectiousness are infected people who do not seem to infect others. During the MERS outbreak in South Korea, 89 percent of patients did not appear to transmit the disease.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.In the Covid-19 pandemic, there is a striking example from the far end of uninfectious — a couple in Illinois.On Jan. 23 the wife, who had returned from a visit to Wuhan — became the first laboratory-confirmed case of Covid-19 in the state. On Jan. 30, her husband was infected. It was the first known person-to person transmission in the United States.Both husband and wife became gravely ill and were hospitalized. Both recovered.State public health officials traced their contacts — 372 people, including 195 health care workers. Not a single one became infected.Dr. Jennifer Layden, chief medical officer for the Chicago Department of Public Health, said the remarkable lack of spread probably arose from several factors. Where were the couple in the course of their infection when they came into contact with those other people? Were they sneezing or coughing? How close were the contacts? Were the people they interacted with simply less susceptible to infections?As grimly alluring as it is to look for viral superspreaders, there are pitfalls.There is a good chance that a cluster of infections would be attributed to a superspreader when, instead, public health officials missed some transmissions by other people, Dr. Zelner said. And there are social consequences to superspreader stories.“The nature of our society right now is that we are very much interested in the catastrophic,” said Samuel K. Roberts, a medical historian at Columbia. “The best way to do that is to have something that looks like a zombie story. It’s a powerful narrative.”The general public doesn’t need to know if an outbreak was traced to one person, he said.“What’s more important is, How do we protect ourselves?” he said. “Finding patient zero is not going to help. It only stokes fear of the other.”