Who’s on the U.S. Coronavirus Task Force
President Trump formed a coronavirus task force in late January, and members have been meeting regularly. But as the virus began to spread around the globe and infections were confirmed in the United States, Mr. Trump named Vice President Mike Pence as his point person at the end of February, and more administration officials were added to the panel. Among them are internationally known AIDS experts; a former drug executive; infectious disease doctors; and the former attorney general of Virginia.The new coronavirus response coordinator for the White House, Dr. Deborah L. Birx, also holds the rank of ambassador as the State Department’s global AIDS director.An experienced scientist and physician, Dr. Birx will report to Vice President Pence, though White House officials did not specify how her duties will differ from those of Mr. Pence or Alex M. Azar II, the secretary of health and human services who is the chairman of the nation’s coronavirus task force.Nominated by President Obama in 2014 to the State post, Dr. Birx has spent more than three decades working on HIV/AIDS immunology, vaccine research and global health. For the past six years, Dr. Birx, a former Army colonel, has been in charge of the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief and America’s participation in the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. From 2005 to 2014, she also was director of the division for Global HIV/AIDS at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.A biography distributed by the White House said she had “developed and patented vaccines, including leading one of the most influential HIV vaccine trials in history.”During her confirmation hearing in 2014, Dr. Birx spoke with admiration of the government’s ability to come together to confront a deadly disease that threatened the health and welfare of people around the globe.“The history of the end of the 20th century will be forever recorded with the emergence of a new and deadly viral plague that challenged us scientifically, socially and politically,” she told members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. “Fortunately, that history will also record that — eventually — we faced our own fears of the disease and embraced those infected and affected with the open arms of compassion, creative research and determined solutions.”Dr. Birx majored in chemistry at Houghton College and received her medical degree from Penn State University’s Hershey School of Medicine.— Michael ShearAlex M. Azar II became secretary of health and human services in January 2018, arriving with a background in government and industry and presenting himself as a problem-solving pragmatist.He replaced Mr. Trump’s initial pick for the job, Tom Price, who had resigned in September 2017 in the face of multiple federal inquiries into his use of private and government planes for travel.Mr. Azar, a former top executive at Eli Lilly, has navigated a series of high-profile issues since taking the job, from attempting to scale back the Affordable Care Act to overseeing the shelters that have housed the thousands of unaccompanied minors separated from their parents during border crossings or who entered the United States alone. He has also sought to address rising drug prices and public health initiatives such as improving the care of people with chronic kidney disease, although many of those policies have not come to fruition.And he has clashed with top health officials, including with Seema Verma, the administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, in a power struggle that required the intervention of the White House.From 2012 to early 2017, Mr. Azar was president of Lilly USA, a unit of Eli Lilly and Company, a major producer of insulin. That history as a drug company executive came under criticism during his Senate confirmation, when Democrats questioned whether he would take the industry’s side on the issue of rising drug prices. Republicans cited that experience as an asset, arguing that it would help him better understand the problems.Mr. Azar, 52, was a law clerk for Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia. He joined the administration of President George W. Bush as general counsel of H.H.S. in 2001 and became deputy secretary four years later. While there, he helped carry out a 2003 law that added a prescription drug benefit to Medicare, one of the most significant changes in the history of the program.Mr. Azar graduated from Yale Law School and grew up in Maryland, where his father was an ophthalmologist and his mother a registered nurse.— Katie ThomasA longtime AIDS researcher, Dr. Robert R. Redfield has served since March 2018 as the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.As such, he is the nation’s chief public health officer, overseeing government response to crises like the opioid epidemic or Ebola, and has had primary responsibility for supervising the federal response to the coronavirus cases in the United States, reporting to Mr. Azar.Dr. Redfield has already been the target of criticism for some of the C.D.C.’s decisions — including testing protocols that may have missed infections, flawed testing kits for the virus and the repatriation of infected patients from the Diamond Princess cruise ship — although it is not clear whether his was the final word on these and related actions.Before taking his post, Dr. Redfield was a professor at the University of Maryland School of Medicine, where he co-founded the Institute of Human Virology, and served as chief of infectious diseases. The institute provided treatment for H.I.V., the human immunodeficiency virus, to more than 6,000 patients in the Baltimore-Washington area and more than 1 million people in Africa and the Caribbean. Earlier in his research career, Dr. Redfield advocated broad testing for H.I.V. and the screening of military personnel for the virus — and faced renewed criticism for those views when he was nominated to the C.D.C. post.A native of Chicago, Dr. Redfield grew up in Bethesda, Md., where both of his parents worked at the National Institutes of Health. He graduated from Georgetown University and its School of Medicine, and did his residency at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, then continued as a researcher there, focusing on AIDS. He launched the virology institute with Dr. Robert C. Gallo, who developed the blood test for H.I.V. in 1996.— Sheila KaplanAs head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health since 1984, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci has played a central role in research of disease outbreaks, and the search for cures, since the emergence of HIV/AIDs — as he is doing now with the coronavirus.He testifies regularly to Congress about the threat of emerging diseases and has been one of the most prominent leaders of the government’s front line on public health.Behind the scenes, though, is where Dr. Fauci is considered most influential: He helps shape the decisions about where research should be directed in search of a response or cure. Overall, Dr. Fauci oversees an agency with a budget of $5.9 billion for 2020.Dr. Fauci grew up in Brooklyn. His father was a pharmacist. attended Holy Cross College and graduated from Cornell University Medical College in 1966. His life shifted significantly in 1981, when he was working at the N.I.H. and gay men began showing up with devastated immune systems.Dr. Fauci, while certainly not known in popular culture circles, carries a kind of celebrity status among scientists. That might stem in part from the amount of research money he controls but also because of his ease with communicating deep science both with nuance and accessibility, making him a translator of sorts during times of crisis.Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, one of the top immigration officials in the United States, has brought his firebrand approach to Mr. Trump’s coronavirus task force.He leads the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency overseeing legal immigration, while simultaneously working as acting deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. In nine months, the former attorney general of Virginia has gone from defending Mr. Trump’s aggressive immigration policies on Fox News to representing the Homeland Security Department on virus response.Mr. Cuccinelli coordinates the screening of travelers at airports, and land and maritime ports, and has overseen the monitoring of people who have recently traveled to China or shown signs of illness.In his short time with the Homeland Security department, Mr. Cuccinelli has irked other agency leaders with his aggressive communication to the public — including when he said the sonnet on the Statue of Liberty poem referred to “people coming from Europe.”Mr. Cuccinelli was similarly criticized on Monday afternoon when he complained on Twitter that he could not gain access to a Johns Hopkins University map of the spreading coronavirus outbreak.“I’m sure it’s jarring to the public to see a very high ranking federal official sending out an S.O.S. on Twitter,” said January Contreras, who was a senior adviser to Janet Napolitano, his predecessor at the homeland security agency.After Senator Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader from New York, said Mr. Cuccinelli’s appointment to the task force showed how “hollowed out” federal agencies are, Mr. Cuccinelli pointed the finger at Mr. Schumer for not attending a briefing on the virus.In an interview with The New York Times earlier this month, Mr. Cuccinelli said he spent much of his time since being appointed to the task force calling hundreds of local politicians to coordinate their responses to the virus.Born in Edison, N.J., Mr. Cuccinelli was raised in Virginia. He graduated from the University of Virginia with an engineering degree and from George Mason University with a law degree.— Zolan Kanno-YoungsUpdated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Dr. Adams became the U.S. surgeon general in 2017, after serving for three years as the health commissioner for Indiana. He holds the rank of vice admiral in the U.S. Public Health Service, and oversees about 6,500 public health officers, many of whom work in underserved areas around the world.Dr. Adams, 45, trained as an anesthesiologist. He is a strong advocate of needle exchanges to stop the spread of diseases, and in Indiana, helped establish one that is credited with contributing to the end of an unusual H.I.V. outbreak among people in a rural community who were injecting a prescription painkiller.He made news early in his tenure by talking about the toll that drug addiction has taken on his own family.In recent weeks, as concern over the coronavirus has grown, he has taken to Twitter and to television, advising the public to keep calm. He has also asked the public to stop buying masks, so that there will be enough for health care providers.In a rare surgeon general advisory in 2018 — the first since 2005 — he urged Americans to carry naloxone, a medication that can save the lives of people overdosing on opioids.Earlier this year, Dr. Adams warned that too many smokers are not being advised by their doctors to quit. In a report issued in January, the surgeon general advised smokers to choose from a variety of cessation methods that have been proven effective — and cautioned that e-cigarettes have not.“The biggest take-home from this report is that far too many people who want to quit aren’t getting access to the cessation treatments that we know work,” he said at the time.Dr. Adams grew up on his family’s farm in Mechanicsville, Md. He earned his bachelor’s degrees in biochemistry and psychology from the University of Maryland, Baltimore County; a master of public health degree from the University of California, Berkeley; and a medical degree from Indiana University School of Medicine.Before becoming health commissioner Dr. Adams was an assistant professor of anesthesiology at Indiana University Health.— Sheila KaplanSeema Verma became the administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in March 2017, after serving as a top health policy adviser to Vice President Mike Pence when he was the governor of Indiana.Her agency, which spends more than $1 trillion a year on programs providing health care to more than one-third of all Americans is the biggest within the Department of Health and Human Services. Since Ms. Verma took the helm, she has advocated repealing the Affordable Care Act and, short of that, reining in the law’s expansion of Medicaid to millions of low-income adults.Working with Mr. Pence in Indiana, she was an architect of that state’s conservative approach to Medicaid expansion, which emphasized “personal responsibility” by requiring many beneficiaries to pay premiums or risk being locked out of coverage for six months.At C.M.S., Ms. Verma has encouraged states to require many of the adults who became eligible for Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act to work, volunteer or train for a job, and prove to their state that they are doing so, or lose coverage. Those “work requirements” have been struck down by several courts for failing to comport with the objective of Medicaid as defined under federal law — providing health coverage to the poor.Her relationship with Alex M. Azar II, the health and human services secretary, has been rocky, to the point that the White House stepped in to mediate late last year. She also came under fire from Democrats for spending several million dollars on public relations contracts that were partly meant to raise her public profile; the contracts are now under review by the department’s inspector general.Ms. Verma, 49, founded a health policy consulting firm, SVC Inc., in 2001, which also advised Kentucky and Ohio on how to shape their Medicaid expansion programs and worked with a number of other states. After her confirmation as administrator of C.M.S., she sold the company to Health Management Associates.A first-generation American whose parents immigrated from India, Ms. Verma was born in Virginia and has listed Missouri, the Washington, D.C. suburbs and Taiwan as places she lived earlier in life. She graduated from the University of Maryland and has a masters in public health from Johns Hopkins University.— Abby Goodnough