W.H.O. Declares Global Emergency as Wuhan Coronavirus Spreads
By Sui-Lee Wee, Donald G. McNeil Jr. and Javier C. HernándezThe World Health Organization declared a global health emergency on Thursday as the coronavirus outbreak spread well beyond China, where it emerged last month. The move reversed the organization’s decision just a week ago to hold off such a declaration. Since then, there have been thousands of new cases in China and clear evidence of human-to-human transmission in several other countries, including the United States. All of which warranted a reconsideration by the W.H.O.’s emergency committee, officials said.The declaration “is not a vote of no confidence in China,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director-general. “On the contrary, the W.H.O. continues to have confidence in China’s capacity to control the outbreak.”The declaration comes now, he said, because of fears that the coronavirus may reach countries with weak health care systems, where it could run amok, potentially infecting millions of people and killing thousands.Following the declaration, the State Department on Thursday night warned travelers to avoid China altogether. China’s Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, Hua Chunying, said that the country “is fully confident and capable of winning the battle against this epidemic.” In a statement on the ministry’s website, she added that China was willing to continue to work with the W.H.O. and other countries to safeguard public health.The W.H.O.’s declaration — officially called a “public health emergency of international concern” — does not have the force of law. The agency is governed by an annual convocation of the health ministers of all U.N. countries, and its role is only to offer advice. Governments then make their own decisions about how they protect themselves.States of emergency are “merely guidance,” said Dr. David L. Heymann, a former W.H.O. assistant director-general who now analyzes the work of the agency’s emergency committee. Governments and even private companies “may or may not follow it.”Nonetheless, emergency declarations signal that the world’s top health advisory body thinks the situation is grave. Many scientific experts welcomed the decision. The public health emergency “allows them to further lean into the role of global leadership for governments and the private sector,” said Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and a veteran of several global health emergencies. The first goal, he said, should be to understand more about how the virus is spreading — whether mostly in hospitals and clinics, what ages and sexes or professions are most affected, how sick they become and what risk factors are dangerous.But Amir Attaran, a professor of law and epidemiology at the University of Ottawa and a frequent W.H.O. critic, called the declaration “inexcusably late.” The committee’s reasoning that it lacked enough scientific evidence to declare an emergency last week was “balderdash,” he added. “W.H.O. is paralyzed for the same political reasons that ruined its scientific judgment in SARS, Ebola and Zika,” he said. “Borders are closed, aircraft grounded and ships anchored as W.H.O. mutely dithers over whether or not to declare an emergency.”“Events have comprehensively overtaken them, proving their uselessness yet again,” he added. Declaring emergencies is always a hard decision, Dr. Tedros said on Wednesday. Border closings and flight cancellations may cause hardships for millions of healthy people near the epicenter, and enormous economic disruption.In the worst cases, supplies of food and medicine can run short and panic can spread, threatening to do more damage than the disease.Experts at the W.H.O. have lavishly and repeatedly praised China’s response as remarkably aggressive. The country is building two hospitals, in just two weeks, to house coronavirus patients. Chinese scientists deposited the genetic signature of the coronavirus in public databases, greatly speeding the development of diagnostic tests and, potentially, vaccines.Chinese authorities cordoned off the major cities at the outbreak’s epicenter, Hubei Province, stranding more than 50 million people at the height of the Lunar New Year holidays — a measure that few other countries could have undertaken. Whether that massive cordon will prove effective remains to be seen. Five million people were able to leave Wuhan, the city where the outbreak began, before its train and bus stations and airports were closed, the mayor said. There were soon outbreaks across the country. Dr. Tedros praised the Chinese government, saying it “is setting a new standard for outbreak response.” Other countries should be grateful that only 98 of the nearly 10,000 cases confirmed so far have occurred outside China’s borders, he said. Despite the emergency declaration, and despite the State Department’s urging Americans to stay away from China, the W.H.O. opposes restrictions on travel to China or on trade with it. Measures the agency considers unwarranted include border closures, visa restrictions and the quarantining of apparently healthy visitors from the affected regions, said the chairman of the agency’s emergency committee, Dr. Didier Houssin, an adviser to France’s national health security agency.Many such measures have already been taken against China by other countries, and Dr. Houssin said the W.H.O. would question the scientific rationales behind them. Neither he nor Dr. Tedros questioned the decision by the United States and other countries to evacuate their citizens from China, and they said the cancellation of flights by airlines was justified if the real reason was that they had no passengers. Dr. Tedros, who met with President Xi Jinping in Beijing on Tuesday, said he was struck by how much Mr. Xi knew about the outbreak and by the fact that Ma Xiaowei, director of China’s National Health Commission, was on the ground in Wuhan leading the response. Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.That is not say there haven’t been missteps. The W.H.O. last week described its risk assessment for the outbreak as “moderate,” when it should have said “high.” The error was corrected in a footnote to the agency’s report; Dr. Tedros described it on Twitter as a “human error.”Experts in the United States have complained of spotty epidemiological information from China. Also, the W.H.O. cannot share information with Taiwan, which now has eight coronavirus patients, because Taiwan is not a member of the United Nations.The agency “doesn’t want to upset its major stakeholders,” said Charles Clift, a senior consulting fellow at the Chatham House, an international affairs research group in London. “China carries the political clout that other countries don’t.” And the outbreak seems to accelerating, along with its consequences. China said on Friday that another 43 people had died from the disease, bringing the total to 213. No deaths have yet occurred outside China.On Thursday, Russia closed much of its 2,600-mile border with China and stopped all train service between the countries, except for a regular train between Moscow and Beijing. Some airlines, including British Airways, have stopped flying there; others are greatly reducing their service. Within China, some medical experts have questioned their country’s response, arguing that local officials should have imposed stricter travel restrictions before the virus spilled out of Wuhan. The country has now confirmed cases in every province and region.Residents have complained that local authorities kept mum about the outbreak’s severity — initially insisting that there was no evidence of person-to-person transmission outside Wuhan — but admitted the truth after press reports in Hong Kong.As the dimensions of the outbreak became clear, the mayor of Wuhan on Monday offered to resign.A W.H.O. delegation was allowed to visit Wuhan for just one day. Dr. Gauden Galea, the organization’s representative in Beijing, said the visit was not intended “to pass judgment.” “Everything is being done with a sense of intensity, and to our assessment, good practice,” he added. “I don’t want to be an apologist. You have to understand the large scale and the comprehensiveness of the operation.”Following the trip, China agreed to permit international experts coordinated by the W.H.O. into the country to work with Chinese scientists on containing the epidemic. The C.D.C. is assembling a team to join them.The W.H.O. has made just five emergency declarations since its power to do so was established in 2005: for the pandemic influenza in 2009; a polio resurgence in 2014; the Ebola epidemic in West Africa that year; the Zika virus outbreak in 2016; and an Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo last year.Dr. Peter Piot, director of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and one of the discoverers of the Ebola virus and the presence of AIDS in Africa, agreed with the W.H.O.’s emergency declaration but felt the process was flawed.“It is time for the W.H.O. to change its all-or-nothing, binary approach” to declaring an emergency, Dr. Piot said. “In every emergency, there is a spectrum of alert levels.”Dr. Tedros expressed the same frustration at a news conference on Wednesday, suggesting that the agency might need to switch to a graduated “green-yellow-red" system.Austin Ramzy contributed reporting from Hong Kong, and Chris Horton from Taipei. Elsie Chen contributed research. 