California’s Plan to Trace Travelers for Virus Faltered When Overwhelmed, Study Finds
By David WaldsteinIn the early days of the coronavirus outbreak, the United States, like many countries, had a very brief chance to limit the spread of the disease at its borders. Identifying travelers from high-risk countries and tracing their contacts with others would have been critical measures, if put in place early enough.In California, the largest state and a point of entry for thousands of travelers from Asia, a program was established to do just that. But its tracing system was quickly overwhelmed by a flood of passengers, many with inaccurate contact information, and was understaffed in some cases, rendering the program ineffective, according to a study released on Monday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which looked exclusively at California.“Despite intensive effort, the traveler screening system did not effectively prevent introduction of Covid-19 into California,” the report said.In early February, over 11,000 travelers from China — and later Iran — who landed in California were identified for contact tracing. The hope was to keep track of people traveling from high-risk countries, enabling public health officials to identify possible cases of the coronavirus, quarantine them and contact people who were exposed to them to limit the spread of the contagion.But when the program was begun on Feb. 5, several weeks had already passed since the disease was first identified in Wuhan, China. On March 17, the program was abandoned so that health care officials could shift their focus to mitigating the spread of the disease within the state. By mid-March, the coronavirus had already established a foothold in California; preventing further introduction from overseas was seen as less important than fighting it on the ground.“This report is a good example of the challenge of trying to use travel screening to contain and prevent pandemic transmission,” said Dr. Timothy Brewer, a professor of medicine and epidemiology at the University of California, Los Angeles.The report was prepared by the California Department of Public Health for the C.D.C., which also provided similar passenger information to other states.A spokesman for California’s health department said the report spoke for itself. When asked if traveler monitoring is a useful tool in fighting a pandemic, the spokesman referred to a passage in the report noting that it can be effective if begun early enough, but that it is particularly difficult with a respiratory disease like the coronavirus, with which transmission can occur before symptoms arise.The report also said that traveler monitoring is most effective when there is accurate information about passengers and when the number of passengers does not overwhelm the system. None of those conditions existed in this case.Strict measures in smaller countries like New Zealand and Taiwan are believed to have helped contain outbreaks there, Dr. Brewer said. New Zealand instructed everyone coming into the country after the outbreak to spend two weeks in quarantine, and Taiwan instituted similar measures.But those are island nations with much smaller populations, and Dr. Brewer noted that Taiwan began installing its restrictions “within one or two days after becoming aware that Covid-19 existed.”The California program began two days after President Trump ordered restrictions on travel from China. But nearly 40,000 travelers from China, of various nationalities, were still permitted to enter the country two months after the ban was imposed. Many were returning home, and many of them went through Los Angeles and San Francisco.When passengers arrived in California on flights from China during the study period, their information was recorded by customs and border patrol officers and then forwarded to the C.D.C., which in turn sent the contact information to California health officials. Those names were then given to health departments in local jurisdictions throughout the state for contact tracing and follow-ups.Travelers from Iran were included in the program, called Return Traveler Monitoring, beginning on March 5. The study found that three of the passengers, including two from Iran, were later reported to California’s health department as Covid-19 patients.In theory, after their arrival, the travelers would be contacted to see if they developed symptoms and find out whom they had seen in person. If any of the passengers developed symptoms or tested positive for the coronavirus, they could be isolated to prevent further transmission, and anyone they came into contact with could be isolated as well.The C.D.C. report said that, in California, incomplete information made it hard to fully institute the plan. Sometimes names, addresses or phone numbers were inaccurate, and passengers could not be found for follow-ups.Also, the number of people to keep track of was overwhelming. During the seven weeks of the program, a median of 1,431 people from Asia entered California per week, the study said. By comparison, passenger identification during the Ebola outbreak of 2014-15 was effective in California, in part, because only 21 people per week came from affected countries in Africa.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The study also cited the issue of asymptomatic patients, who can spread the disease before showing signs of illness.Still, the C.D.C. report endorsed traveler-monitoring programs, although they are “likely more effective during the initial containment phase” of the outbreak.Once California’s current outbreak is under control, the study said, public health officials should still try to put in place the tracing program, if another wave of disease emerges. But it recommended that it be done in a more efficient and comprehensive way, particularly in collecting accurate information about the passengers.The C.D.C. called on airlines to provide flight passenger lists to federal officials and for health departments to use text messaging to communicate with passengers after they leave the airport. It said all of that might be useful to “maintain low disease incidence.”“The critical words there are ‘low disease incidence,’” Dr. Brewer said. “What they are saying is, this could work if you got on top of it early before your system gets overwhelmed. That’s what Taiwan did.”He added, “In order to do it correctly, you will have to have significantly more resources than are typically available in public health departments.”