Disposable N95 Masks Can Be Decontaminated, Researchers Confirm
By James GormanResearchers have confirmed that there are several effective methods for decontaminating the N95 masks worn by health professionals so that they can be used more than once, the National Institutes of Health announced Wednesday.A substantial body of research already showed that the masks, designed for one-time use, can be reused in a crisis. And the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in March authorized reuse because of shortages driven by the Covid-19 pandemic. In recent weeks the Food and Drug Administration has issued emergency approvals for several systems of mask decontamination.None of these rules or methods are intended for the cloth masks recommended or in some locations required for use by everyone in public. The C.D.C. advises regular washing of homemade fabric masks in a washing machine.Earlier research had not, of course, involved the new coronavirus. The new research, done at the Rocky Mountain Laboratories of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and used live novel coronavirus, formally known as SARS-CoV-2, to test the mask material. The study determined which decontamination procedures were most effective, and how they affected the integrity of the masks.Vincent Munster, one of the authors of the new work, who collaborated with other government researchers and scientists at the University of California, Los Angeles, said the work built on more than a decade of studies of decontamination. “We showed that it actually works as well for SARS-CoV-2 as for influenza,” and for bacteria, he said.The research was posted on MedRxiv, a website where scientists have been posting articles submitted for publication elsewhere that have not yet been through peer review. But N.I.H. publicized the study because it could be helpful to health care professionals in the midst of a crisis, and it was validating and extending previous work, not suggesting untried methods.Dr. Munster and his colleagues tested four methods of killing the virus: UV light, dry heat, vaporized hydrogen peroxide (VHP) and ethyl alcohol. Of those methods, they did not recommend ethyl alcohol because although it killed the virus, it degraded the mask material.The researchers first tested samples of N95 material to which live virus had been applied. That work was done in a biosecure lab. After treatment, they cultured virus particles from the material to see if the shielding remained effective in limiting transmission.Then they tested the same methods on whole masks without the virus to determine whether their structure and functioning were damaged after rounds of decontamination.Dr. Munster said that even if decontamination worked perfectly, but the mask no longer fit “then obviously your mask is not really good for reuse anymore.”Vaporized hydrogen peroxide, a method often available in large hospitals, was effective, and left the masks still functioning for at least three rounds of decontamination, as did UV light.Dry heat, at 70 degrees Celsius or 158 degrees Fahrenheit, was effective, but the masks withstood only two rounds of decontamination. Dr. Munster said that “vaporized hydrogen peroxide would be the method of choice if that’s available.” However, he said, a nursing home might not have that, while for dry heat, what’s needed is basically an oven.Dr. Lynn Goldman, dean of George Washington University’s Milken Institute School of Public Health, said in an email that she thought the new research was an “excellent contribution.” She said it was “helpful to see that either VHP or UV can effectively sterilize N95 masks and make them available for reuse up to three times.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Another recent study from Canadian researchers, also not yet peer reviewed, confirmed the value of decontamination. It included masks of different brands and found that the material of the mask was still effective after 10 rounds of vaporized hydrogen peroxide decontamination.One of the authors of that paper, Dr. Anand Kumar at the University of Manitoba, said that his procedure was slightly different from Dr. Munster’s in that it did not test the structure and facial fit of the mask, only the filtering ability of the material.The recommendations and findings in the two papers are intended to be useful for institutions that have health care workers wearing N95 masks. With personal protective equipment in short supply at many overwhelmed hospitals, some front-line workers, including doctors and nurses, have complained that masks were rationed.The public has been advised not to use or try to buy N95 masks because they would be depriving health care workers of lifesaving equipment.