Coronavirus Cases in the United States Reach 34, and More Are Expected
By Denise GradyAt least 34 people in the United States are infected with the coronavirus spreading from China, federal health officials said on Friday.“This new virus represents a tremendous public health threat,” Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said at a news briefing.But so far there has been no community spread of the infection in the United States, she added; all of the cases have been linked to overseas travel.Eleven of the infections were diagnosed in travelers who fell ill after returning on their own from overseas, and two of their close contacts became infected. The other 21 patients are people who were returned to the United States by the State Department.More infections are expected among the people who were passengers aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship and are currently in quarantine, Dr. Messonnier said.The coronavirus swept through the Diamond Princess after it docked in Yokohama, Japan, and the passengers were not allowed to disembark. More than 600 people onboard have been infected with the virus, testing has shown.Passengers from the ship account for 18 of the 21 cases in repatriated people in the United States. The other three patients had been evacuated earlier from Wuhan, China, the center of the epidemic.Because the Diamond Princess passengers may have been in contact with infected people on the ship, “they are considered at high risk for infection,” Dr. Messonnier said.Ten other passengers from the Diamond Princess tested positive for the virus in Japan, but are not being counted among the infected yet, because the C.D.C. has not confirmed the tests.They will most likely be added to the case count, Dr. Messonnier said. Several Americans remain critically ill with the infection in Japanese hospitals.On Thursday, the State Department posted an advisory urging U.S. citizens to “reconsider” traveling by cruise ship to or within Asia. The department had already advised against travel to China.Of 329 people who were evacuated on two State Department flights, 18 are hospitalized, Dr. Messonnier said: 11 in Nebraska, five near California’s Travis Air Force Base and two near Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio.Fourteen of the Americans were found to have positive test results for the virus just before boarding two charter flights back to the United States. The State Department overruled objections from C.D.C. officials and placed the infected on the plane with healthy passengers.Reports of the disagreement were first published by The Washington Post.Asked during the briefing about the episode, Dr. Messonnier referred the question to Dr. William Walters, executive for operational medicine at the State Department’s medical services bureau.Dr. Walters said that the test results arrived shortly before the passengers were to board the plane, and that on the flight the infected people were seated separately from the rest. He also said that despite the positive tests, the infected people had no symptoms.“The decision was the right one in bringing these people home,” he said.Dr. Messonnier said that decisions were being made “in real time" and that “different perspectives will be brought to the table.” Nonetheless, she added, “We are one U.S. government working together.”The response to the outbreak is being handled “seamlessly,” she said.So far, Dr. Messonnier said, there has been no community spread of the disease in the United States, which means no cases in which the source of the infection is not known.But looking ahead, community spread within the country is very possible and maybe even likely, she said.Cases detected by local health departments in travelers returning independently from overseas, or in their close contacts, are counted separately from infections in people who were evacuated from China by the State Department.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The reason for the distinction, Dr. Messonnier said, is that the cases found locally more accurately represent what is happening within the United States.The C.D.C. is still performing most of the testing for the virus, Dr. Messonnier said. The agency had sent diagnostic test kits to all the states, so they could perform their own tests instead of sending samples to Atlanta. But the new kits were flawed and have yet to be replaced.Passengers quarantined at Lackland Air Force Base were to be moved on Friday to a different part of the base, to less uncomfortable quarters with more reliable heating and cooling, a C.D.C. official, Dr. Nancy Knight, told them during a conference call on Thursday.She said all were being offered tests for the virus, but would be required to stay for the full 14-day quarantine even if they tested negative. The reason is that if an infected person is still in the incubation period, the test may not be able to detect the virus yet.Anyone with a positive test will be tested again and will not be released until two consecutive tests give negative results, Dr. Knight said. The samples have to be sent to Atlanta, so each test takes a few days to complete.The testing is not mandatory, so people who have no symptoms and decline testing will be free to go after 14 days.In couples staying in the same room at the base, if one becomes ill, then the other must begin the 14-day quarantine process all over again, starting with the day the partner’s symptoms began.Because the quarantine is on a military base, all incoming mail has to be inspected, which can delay delivery by several days. One man on the conference call with Dr. Knight said he was expecting prescription medicine by mail and worried that his supply would run out before he would be allowed to receive the new shipment.Officials on the call did not offer a way to expedite delivery for him.