How to Quit Smoking and Vaping During the Coronavirus Pandemic
By Jan HoffmanBecause the coronavirus targets the lungs, doctors and public health officials are adding new urgency to their longstanding plea for smokers and vapers to quit — or at least slow down.Both habits can compromise lung function. Early Covid-19 studies have shown that cigarette smokers in particular are more susceptible to the infection and suffer more severe cases. Doctors are raising similar concerns about vapers.If you have ever considered quitting, right now would be a most excellent time to make a determined effort to do so. Pulmonologists suggest that combining two common methods — the nicotine patch plus either a nicotine gum or lozenge — can boost your chances of success. There are a multitude of apps and online resources to connect people to support groups and good advice.Here is a sampling:1-800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) A free national phone service that routes the caller to the state line associated with caller’s area code. Hours vary.1-800-LUNG-USA (1-800-586-4872) Free phone support for quitting, sponsored by the American Lung Association.877-44U-QUIT (877-448-7848) Trained counselors at the National Cancer Institute provide free information and support in English and Spanish for quitting. Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.Text Quit to 47848 A government-sponsored free texting service that will send you three to five messages daily with support and reminders to help you quit smoking.Text DITCHJUUL to 88709 A free anonymous texting service, called This Is Quitting, that focuses on helping vapers quit, sponsored by the Truth Initiative, a nonprofit organization. It has already reached 145,000 teenagers and young adults. The Truth Initiative reports that about 60 percent show marked improvement within two weeks.Smokefree: Home A government-sponsored website with information in English and Spanish for adults and teenagers who smoke. The site lists support services that are free and readily available, like texting programs and apps with reminders and encouragements.Becomeanex.org A site sponsored by the Truth Initiative to help smokers quit and keep them connected to a community of ex-smokers.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Freedom From Smoking A site from the American Lung Association, with a variety of tools to help quit both smoking and vaping.My Life My Quit A teen-centric site to help vapers and smokers quit, including live chat and phone counseling options. Sponsored by National Jewish Health, a Denver-based system that specializes in respiratory illnesses, among others.Kwit Includes tips, games and motivational thoughts to help stop smoking.MyQuit Coach Offers different approaches to quitting smoking and community support.