In N.Y.C., the Coronavirus Is Killing Men at Twice the Rate of Women
By Roni Caryn RabinIn its inexorable spread across New York City, the coronavirus is exacting a greater toll on men than women. Not only are men infected in greater numbers, new data show, but they are also dying at nearly twice the rate of women.To date, there have been nearly 43 Covid-19 deaths for every 100,000 men in the city, compared with 23 such deaths for every 100,000 women, according to figures reported by the city’s health department. And men are being hospitalized with severe disease at higher rates.The data, while disturbing, do not come entirely as a surprise. Similar trends have been observed in China and Italy, where men were both infected with Covid-19 and succumbed to it at higher rates than women.Possible explanations for the disparity have ranged from differences in behavior — smoking rates among men exceed those among women in much of the world, for example — to biological differences.Women have more robust immune systems, some scientists have noted, that provide an edge in fighting off infections — although it also makes them more susceptible to autoimmune disorders.Physicians working at hospitals throughout the city say the gender disparity is stark and impossible to miss.“I’m in the emergency room, and it’s remarkable — I’d estimate that 80 percent of the patients being brought in are men,” said Dr. Hani Sbitany, a reconstructive surgeon at Mount Sinai Health Systems who has been treating Covid-19 patients in Brooklyn. “It’s four out of five patients.”Most of the patients who are brought in with severe respiratory distress are middle-aged, or in their 60s and older, Dr. Sbitany said. Male patients dominate both groups.A spokesman for New York City’s health department, Michael Lanza, confirmed that the city was seeing a higher rate of Covid-19 cases, hospitalizations and deaths among men, but said the department could not comment on the reasons at this point.The health department, which updates its website daily, had recorded 68,776 Covid-19 cases in the city as of Monday, including 15,333 patients who had been hospitalized and 2,738 deaths. Both death and hospitalization rates increased with age, rising drastically at age 65 and again at age 75.While there were 712 cases per 100,000 women in the city, there were 932 cases for every 100,000 men. Men were also more likely than women to be hospitalized: 228.7 admissions for every 100,000 men, compared with 140.3 admissions for every 100,000 women. (The figures are crude rates and have not been adjusted for differences in age or other characteristics.)But the greatest sex disparity is seen in death rates: 42.9 deaths per 100,000 men, compared with 23.1 deaths per 100,000 women.“More than two-thirds of the intubated patients are men,” said Dr. Joseph Lowy, a palliative care and hospice doctor at N.Y.U. Langone Health, referring to patients on ventilators.“I know of no other disease that has that type of predilection for one gender over another,” excluding diseases of the reproductive system, he added.Dr. Jennifer Lighter, an infectious disease specialist at N.Y.U. Langone, said that a statistical analysis of Covid-19 patients in the hospital system did not find a higher death rate among male patients.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]But when death rates were adjusted for age and obesity, both of which are higher over all in female patients, the case fatality rate among infected men is higher.A disproportionate effect on men has also been seen in California, which has reported 7,296 Covid-19 cases among infected men and 6,740 among women. In Italy, the case fatality rate was 8 percent for infected men compared with 5 percent for women, according to one analysis of 25,058 Covid-19 cases. (Men represented 70 percent of 1,697 deaths tallied by that study.)In China, one of the largest analyses of Covid-19 cases reported a 2.8 percent case fatality rate among infected men, compared with a 1.7 percent rate among women.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Kathryn Sandberg, who directs the Center for the Study of Sex Differences in Health, Aging and Disease at Georgetown University, said she was not surprised by the disparity in death rates, though it appears to be more extreme in Covid-19 than in some other infectious diseases.“It may be something about the way this virus works,” said Dr. Sandberg, who studies sex differences in hypertension.“But generally, in humans, it doesn’t matter what the infectious agent is,” she added. “Women tend to be better at knocking it down, because they have a more robust immune system.”Women live longer than men, and they tend to develop hypertension and heart disease — both of which increase the risk of severe disease with Covid-19 — at later ages than men. The X chromosome — women have two, of course, and men only one — and the female hormone estrogen are believed to play a role in immunity.One possible explanation for the disparity in Covid-19 may have to do with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, or ACE2, a protein on the surfaces of cells the lungs and other organs that is a key component of the system that regulates blood pressure, Dr. Sandberg said.ACE2 is regulated differently in men and in women, Dr. Sandberg said, and the coronavirus binds to ACE2.Dr. Mangala Narasimhan, a critical care doctor at Northwell Health, said hospitals throughout that system, including those in Queens and on Long Island, also are seeing a gender disparity.Though she did not have precise numbers, Dr. Narasimhan estimated that men represent 65 percent of Northwell’s Covid-19 patients.“More of them go on ventilators, and because they have more severe disease, more of them are dying,” she said. “We don’t know why — I don’t think anyone does right now.”