Westerdam Passengers at Low Risk of Coronavirus Infection, C.D.C. Says
By Roni Caryn RabinPassengers aboard the cruise ship Westerdam who have returned to the United States no longer need to isolate themselves and can resume normal activities, despite the fact that one passenger tested positive for the new coronavirus in Malaysia, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has advised.A spokesman for the agency said on Saturday that the passenger’s diagnosis, confirmed twice by health officials in Malaysia, was a false-positive and noted that no other infections among passengers aboard the ship had been reported.But on Sunday, the agency said that it had no direct evidence that the test result was a false-positive. Malaysian health officials announced that the passenger, an 83-year-old American woman, now tests negative for the infection, but experts say that is to be expected in a patient recovering from the illness.(The test looks for an active infection; it is not an antibody test, which can tell whether a patient has ever been infected.)“I’m thinking they must have some information from the testing laboratory in Malaysia that would give the C.D.C. confidence in saying yes, that was a false-positive result,” said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University.“Obviously, if it was a true positive, you would keep all those people in self-monitoring.”The C.D.C. had issued that advice to state and local health departments last week, telling Westerdam passengers that they should restrict public activities for 14 days because they might have been exposed to the virus.The owner of the ship, Holland America Lines, a division of Carnival Cruise Lines, celebrated the loosening of restrictions on Westerdam passengers.“While we were not surprised by these results, we were very pleased to receive this confirmation,” Holland America said in a letter to Westerdam passengers. “C.D.C. does not recommend isolation or quarantine for guests returning home from Westerdam.”On Sunday, the C.D.C. also said that Westerdam passengers would not require testing for the coronavirus. Tests of nearly 1,500 passengers, mostly conducted by Cambodian health officials, had turned up no other infections, the agency said, and therefore the passengers are at little to no risk of carrying the virus.The Westerdam carried about 2,000 passengers, however, and those who left Cambodia first were never tested for the coronavirus.The Cambodian government has regarded its embrace of the Westerdam as a political event and humanitarian gesture, and the country’s prime minister, Hun Sen, was incensed when Malaysian health officials said that the American passenger, who was identified as she arrived in Kuala Lumpur, was ill with the coronavirus.Following the C.D.C.’s initial statement that the test was a false-positive, Mr. Hun Sen accused Malaysia of shoddy lab work. The woman never had coronavirus at all, he asserted.“The irresponsibility of some foreigners on the health test of Westerdam passengers makes Cambodia the victim of its humanitarian work,” Mr. Hun Sen said in a Facebook post on Saturday.“If I were the Malaysian P.M., I would remove the health minister for being neglectful and irresponsible.”Testing for the coronavirus has proved problematic, said Dr. Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, and questions have been raised about the test’s sensitivity.A diagnostic test produced by the C.D.C. and sent to state health departments turned out to be flawed, and new test kits must be manufactured.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“If the C.D.C., a world renowned scientific institution, is having trouble, it’s highly likely others are having trouble as well,” Dr. Nuzzo said.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]Timing is also critical: People who test negative may turn positive a few days later, depending on when during the incubation period a sample is taken.Very few Americans are being tested. The C.D.C. requires people to be symptomatic and to report having had a clear route of exposure, such as recent travel to Wuhan.“It’s important to put this one potential case in the context of thousands and thousands whom we are not testing,” Dr. Nuzzo added. “South Korea has tested more than 20,000 people. We have tested probably under 1,000.”Questions about the possible exposure of Westerdam passengers to the coronavirus have swirled since Feb. 1, when the ship picked up 768 new passengers in Hong Kong and embarked on a 14-day voyage whose itinerary included stops at ports in the Philippines, Taiwan, Japan and South Korea.But Hong Kong already had at least 10 cases of coronavirus by the end of January, and announced its first death early in February.The cruise line tweaked the Westerdam’s itinerary, but one port after another turned it away, and it remained at sea for nearly two weeks until Cambodia allowed it to dock in Sihanoukville on Feb. 13.