Three Weeks in April: An E.M.T. Crew Faces Exhaustion, Isolation and Death
Supported byPhotographs and Text by Andrew RenneisenAfter three years living in Nairobi, Kenya, working as a photojournalist throughout Africa and the Middle East, I decided I wanted to move home and pursue a career in public safety. I had always been interested in emergency medicine and was an emergency medical technician in college, so I got recertified and was hired by Empress Emergency Medical Service in a suburb of New York City last September.I remember reading briefly about the coronavirus earlier this year but not thinking much of it — until the second documented case in New York State was announced in early March, in Empress’s coverage area, New Rochelle.As cases multiplied, and our work became riskier and more intense, I felt an obligation to document. Over the course of three weeks in April, I photographed my colleagues as we worked to do our part to combat the pandemic that has frozen our country.Empress’s E.M.T.s and paramedics work shifts that can range from eight to 24 hours. Last month Empress responded to about 350 cardiac arrest calls, many of them the result of complications stemming from Covid-19. The monthly average for cardiac arrest calls before the pandemic was 30 to 40.AndrewJohn Briones is the operations captain at Empress Ambulance. He has been in emergency medical services for the past 12 years and said he’d never seen anything like this.“Not many people alive today have ever seen anything like this, nor could imagine that something could cripple the world like this,” he said.I watched Captain Briones have difficult conversations with people who were likely sick with the virus, the same kind of conversations I was having with my patients.Often there is a tough decision to be made on whether they should go to the hospital. You can stay home and risk getting sicker or go to the hospital and possibly die alone.“I always worry if the family truly understands that this might be the last time they see their family member,” Captain Briones said, “if this would be what they would want.”Captain Briones checked an E.K.G. of a man showing flu-like symptoms.Lieutenant Cosgrove helped Gustavo Flores, 69, with supplemental oxygen in his home.Mr. Flores with his wife, Sofia, as he was taken on a stretcher to be put in an ambulance. Ms. Flores tested positive for the coronavirus but had not been feeling sick.Paramedic Samantha Tushaj filled out patient care reports on an overnight shift at Empress headquarters in Yonkers.Captain Briones spoke to family members of a man showing flulike symptoms, explaining via FaceTime to a family member who didn’t understand the recommendation to stay home except for emergencies.E.M.T.s assisted a man who had fainted on a bus, eventually determining the fainting spell wasn’t Covid-related.Captain Briones on a call to a man who said he was feeling short of breath. He was taken to the hospital, a likely Covid-19 case.Most of the time we don’t know what happens to the patients we treat. I’ve found this to be one of the most difficult parts of the job, especially right now.We treat people in the field, transport them to the hospital, then don’t ever hear from them again. Often, I don’t know if the patients I brought to the hospital lived or died.Many of us are also struggling with isolation from friends and family. My colleague, Austin Magnuson, 25, a paramedic from Dallas, has been sleeping in the basement of his home for the past month because he is worried that he might infect his partner and roommates.I haven’t seen my partner, Maya, or my dog, Bear, since March 14. We decided it was best for Maya to stay upstate because her father suffers from a compromised respiratory system. We were scared that I could pass the virus to her, which in turn could infect her dad. I’ve found coming home to an empty apartment hard. I know I’m not alone in this experience.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Paramedic Natalie Rivera with a patient showing Covid symptoms.E.M.T.’s took oxygen levels of a woman whose home health aid had tested positive for Covid-19. She had been displaying its symptoms.Paramedic Cris Loguidice, E.M.T. Vincent Cabrera and Captain Briones helped the woman onto a stretcher.Paramedic Brianna Keesler with a kitten rescued from an emergency call. The crew named the kitten “Rona.”Captain Briones spoke with a mother and her daughter outside their home. The girl had been coughing for a few days, but she and her mother decided to stay home after discussing it with Captain Briones.Lt. Rebekah Cosgrove became a supervisor at Empress a month before the coronavirus outbreak hit.“The hardest part is seeing the toll it will or already has taken on health care workers’ mental health, ” she said.For most of us on the Empress crews, this is the most death we’ve have ever had to deal with.“I don’t think I’ve ever come to work and prepared to be dealing with fatalities and loss on a scale like this,” Mr. Magnuson said. “It’s the first time I really thought about losing people I care about. I’ve never felt so powerless.”“I think for me the biggest thing for me is to take it one day at a time,” he added. “Some days are going to be worse than others. Some days will be more frustrating than the others. I tell myself every day, ‘One day at a time.’”Paramedic Austin Magnuson tended to a woman in cardiac arrest. “It’s the first time I really thought about losing people I care about. I’ve never felt so powerless,” he said.Lieutenant Cosgrove spoke to family members while attending to a possible Covid patient.E.M.T. David Mullan with a patient.E.M.T.s Jahrodney Williams and Samantha Moore moved an elderly patient from a nursing home to an ambulance. The patient was showing signs of both Covid-19 and sepsis.Captain Briones played a game on his phone, awaiting the next call. “I need these stupid games right now. It helps take your mind off the things it sees,” he said.