UnitedHealth Reports Profit, Citing Falling Demand for Elective Care
By Reed AbelsonUnitedHealth Group, one of the nation’s major insurers, reported on Wednesday that its earnings actually increased this past quarter, adding that the costs of the coronavirus pandemic were offset by the cancellations of routine medical appointments and elective surgeries for hip replacements and other conditions.The company’s report provided an early glimpse of how the crisis is affecting the U.S. health care industry, which in many regions has been overwhelmed by emergency and intensive care of patients infected by the virus. Tens of billions of dollars in federal funds are now flowing to hospitals dealing with the crisis as part of the $2 trillion stimulus bill passed by Congress last month.The company, which operates one of the nation’s largest health insurers as well as physician groups and surgery centers, announced on Wednesday that the coronavirus pandemic had “minimal impact” on its earnings.UnitedHealth reported earnings from operations increased by 3 percent, to $5 billion, for the first quarter of 2020, compared with the same three months of 2019, on revenue of $64 billion.The company said it was not changing its profit outlook for the year, but executives emphasized that it was too soon to predict what the final impact of coronavirus would be on its varied businesses. The pandemic began hitting communities in the United States heavily in the last month, and elective procedures only began to decline in early to-mid-March once public health experts and state governmental officials urged hospitals to clear beds for coronavirus patients.“These are still early days in the response to Covid-19 and we anticipate we will experience and learn more as events unfold in the months ahead,” UnitedHealth’s chief executive, David Wichmann, told investors.The possibility that overall medical costs could be lower might help allay fears that the crisis could lead to sharply higher insurance premiums for consumers next year.Mr. Wichmann indicated that employers could see some relief in the rates charged by UnitedHealth if the cost of care for patients with Covid-19 was significantly outweighed by savings in the reduction in other kinds of care so that its overall expenses were lower than it had originally expected. “It remains to be seen whether we can do that and if it makes sense,” he said.Mr. Wichmann cited various efforts the company had made to help its customers and providers, including advancing nearly $2 billion in payments to hospitals and doctors strapped for cash during the pandemic. The company also said it would not request “any government assistance” as a result of the crisis.Executives did not rule out the possibility that there could be much higher demand for medical care later in the year, although they were careful to avoid predicting when a potential rebound might occur. “We haven’t seen a cessation in activity like this,” said John Rex, the company’s chief financial officer.During the call with investors, Mr. Rex took pains to emphasize that the company’s experience with previous events like hurricanes or the Great Recession might not be helpful. “This situation is so different from anything we’ve seen before,” he said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The high levels of unemployment that have already been recorded in claims may also affect employer plans, resulting in lower enrollment. But executives said they also expected that people without job-based coverage would seek alternative sources of insurance, benefiting the company’s Medicaid and coverage for individual businesses.The company says many of its customers are already seeking to delay payments on the premiums they owe.The company, which also offers short-term plans that do not meet the standards set under the Affordable Care Act, indicated that it had already been considering offering Obamacare plans in additional markets. UnitedHealth was among the major insurers that pulled out of A.C.A. markets because of heavy losses.