Despite Qualms, Arthritis Drug Is to Be Tested in Coronavirus Study
By Gina KolataAn Eli Lilly drug for rheumatoid arthritis carries a warning on its label saying patients with infections should not take it because it can make infections worse. Yet the National Institutes of Health is about to test it in people hospitalized with coronavirus infections.The study, whose innovative design is meant to find out — fast — what works, began at the end of February with the antiviral drug remdesivir made by Gilead Sciences. Four hundred patients have been treated either with remdesivir or a placebo. The results are now being analyzed and will be known within a few weeks.Then the study will move on to baricitinib, made by Eli Lilly and Company, the company said.Jennifer Routh, a spokeswoman at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, confirmed that the drug would now be tested in the federal trial but said the institute could offer no further comment.Dan Skovronsky, chief scientific officer at Lilly, explained how and why baricitinib was chosen.In February, when the new coronavirus was emerging as a pandemic threat, a company in the United Kingdom called Benevolent AI began using its artificial intelligence system to look for approved drugs that could possibly help people with coronavirus infections. It pointed toward baricitinib precisely because it suppresses the immune system. That, the company suggested, might allow it to quell a cytokine storm, a disastrous immune system response that kills patients.As a coronavirus infection progresses, the amount of the virus infecting cells does not appear to be extremely high. But the immune system in some people goes into overdrive, sending out vast amounts of small proteins — cytokines — that trigger inflammation. Cytokine storms can kill patients with other diseases, including flu. This immune overreaction, some scientists think, could explain why some people infected with coronavirus have only mild symptoms while others have severe or fatal illnesses.Benevolent AI also noted another potential advantage of baricitinib, said Dr. Vincent Marconi of Emory University, a key investigator in the federal trial. The drug might have anti-viral activity. That, plus the chance of subduing cytokine storms, Dr. Marconi said, “made a compelling case for baricitinib to be explored further in a clinical trial.”At Lilly, executives were a bit skeptical.“Our initial reaction was, ‘Does it make sense to immunosuppress when patients are trying to fight off an infection?’” Dr. Skovronsky said. The warning label on the drug, he added, “tempered our enthusiasm.”As Covid-19 spread, some doctors started giving patients the drug anyway. It is a pill and there is a huge supply, making it easy for doctors to prescribe it off-label.Dr. Skovronsky and his colleagues at Lilly were concerned.“We are extremely cautious,” said Patrik Jonsson, Lilly’s president of biomedicines. “We cannot encourage use.”But such warnings were not enough.“In desperate times, doctors are trying everything,” Dr. Skovronsky said. “Various drugs are just being tried on patients in clinical trials without a control. It is really hard to interpret those kinds of data.”The company realized it had to accept the offer to contribute its drug for the federal trial.Dr. Andre Kalil, a principal investigator in the federal trial, urged doctors and patients to refrain from using baricitinib until the results of the federal trial are known, which should be in a matter of months.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“This is a drug that has never been used before in this situation,” he said. “That is why it needs to be tested in a randomized clinical trial. We don’t know if it will help or harm. We have so much uncertainty.”The final design of the next phase of the federal trial is still being worked out, but the expectation is that it will include 600 to 800 patients, Dr. Marconi said. If the first phase of the study finds that remdesivir seems to help patients, half of the patients in the second phase will take remdesivir plus a placebo pill, and half will get remdesivir plus baricitinib.If remdesivir is no better than or even worse than placebo — a very real possibility given the progress so far of a company-sponsored study in China — one group of patients will get a placebo pill and the other group will get baricitinib.“We are looking for a strong effect,” Dr. Skovronsky said. “If it works, it will be big. If it doesn’t, we will move on.”