These Doctors Have Specialties. Fighting Coronavirus Wasn’t One of Them.
By Emma GoldbergDr. Scott Isaacs has worked as an endocrinologist for more than two decades, focused on the medical needs of adults with diabetes in the Atlanta area. He never expected to be serving on the front lines of a pandemic.For weeks, his phone has been ringing off the hook. His diabetes patients, a high-risk group for coronavirus infection, want to know: How can they get tested? How can they stockpile extra medication? And can he write to their employers to recommend they work from home?Last week, Dr. Isaacs saw a patient with Type 1 diabetes, a nurse who is 10 weeks pregnant. She asked him how long she should stay home from work to avoid possible exposure, and he had to respond honestly: “I really don’t have an answer to that.”Dr. Isaacs is used to relying on his medical expertise, but the coronavirus has suddenly put him in new territory, an experience shared by many medical specialists who may serve as the primary physicians of patients with particular medical needs. Physicians across every field who are trained to care for very specific medical problems are confronting a surge of patient questions and scrambling to keep up with rapid changes in case numbers and advisories from governments and health agencies.“We’re hearing a lot of anxieties from specialists who don’t know what the right thing to do is for their patients,” said Dr. Megan Ranney, an emergency physician in Rhode Island. “Dermatologists, ophthalmologists, we’re even hearing from dentists.”Dr. Sandra Weber, president of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, said the coronavirus outbreak had made it immediately clear how much Americans rely on medical specialists.“It has exposed that not every person has a primary care provider,” she said, referring to people who may not regularly see an internist or family doctor.Their first calls to the medical system could be to a specialist they’ve been seeing for a particular health problem. Specialists in heart medicine, lung care and obstetrics have training that is highly pertinent to treating the effects of the coronavirus. But specialists in other fields are hearing queries they may not be used to answering.Endocrinologists like Dr. Weber are helping their patients coordinate extra supplies of medication, in case they need to self-isolate. And psychiatrists, especially on campuses, are facing a barrage of questions on an array of topics, like potential virus exposure and the sudden upending of work and academic schedules.For Dr. Gauri Khurana, a psychiatrist who works predominantly with college students, the coronavirus questions began as a trickle from patients with family in China. In recent weeks, it’s become a flood of anxious phone calls from young people wondering about how they’ll complete graduation requirements or whether they might be infected.“I don’t think a lot of them have primary care doctors and at this point everyone is terrified, wondering what’s going to happen,” she said. “I have patients that want to drop out of school, move to Canada. They’re grateful for any advice, especially coming from a doctor because there’s so much misinformation.”So Dr. Khurana, reading news articles nonstop to educate herself on the virus, has done her best to counsel her patients on practical steps to prevent exposure: using credit cards instead of cash, wearing gloves when going outside and carrying personal items in sandwich bags. “I wish I had taken sandwich bags to work and given everyone a sandwich bag,” she said.For specialists who treat high-risk demographics, the best medical advice for the coronavirus outbreak can feel contradictory: To stay safe, try to avoid the doctor’s office. Both the Surgeon General and the American College of Surgeons have advised that hospitals cancel elective procedures in the coming weeks, and some states have ordered postponements.Dr. Rajeev Jain, a gastroenterologist in Dallas, sees a large number of patients with autoimmune disorders like Crohn’s. To help minimize their risk of coronavirus exposure, he has canceled appointments that aren’t immediately necessary — on a normal Monday and Tuesday he would see 30 patients, and this week he’ll see six.Much of his time is now spent fielding calls from patients who wonder if they should stop taking their immunosuppressive medications in order to minimize risk of serious infection. Following a joint advisory from American gastroenterological associations, Dr. Jain has told patients to continue their course of normal treatment.He worries that if his patients stop taking medications, they could contract other illnesses and be hospitalized. “That’s where a large reservoir of Covid-19 is at the moment,” he said. “That’s the last thing I want to do.”As physicians brace for what they realize will be an increasingly challenging period, representatives of medical associations say they are moving quickly to develop and distribute resources to support their members. Patrice Harris, president of the American Medical Association, said the association had developed a Covid-19 online resource center and physician’s guide. She added that the association was aware of and working to address shortages in protective equipment for physicians, like N-95 respirators.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.As fears about the virus spread in local communities, physicians are also facing unanticipated stress. Dr. Isaacs said his clinic had been robbed four times of masks, sanitizing wipes and hand soap. Dr. Supriya Mahajan, a neurologist at a private practice in Ohio, said that she’s had to confront the financial losses of converting most in-person appointments to telemedicine because her partner in the practice is her father, whose age makes him at high-risk for severe Covid-19.And some specialists wonder whether, in the weeks to come, they might be called in to assist with front-line care. Dr. Jain works at a Dallas hospital that treated Ebola patients in 2014 and recalls when I.C.U. doctors were put in quarantine.“We don’t know if in two weeks there will be a surge and we’ll be pulled in to take care of patients in the E.R.,” he said. “The system is already starting to get overwhelmed.”Dr. Jain’s days are now filled with all sorts of new precautions: designating clothing just for work, removing his scrubs before coming home, hand sanitizing more often than he already did. It’s an adjustment, he said, to his routine life as a gastrointestinal specialist.But foremost on his mind is the health of his patients.“I’m reminded that this is why I got into medicine in the first place,” Dr. Jain said. “I need to step up now and do what I can to help.”