A Coronavirus Vaccine Project Takes a Page From Gene Therapy
By Denise GradyResearchers at two Harvard-affiliated hospitals are adapting a proven form of gene therapy to develop a coronavirus vaccine, which they expect to test in people later this year, they announced on Monday.Their work employs a method already used in gene therapy for two inherited diseases, including a form of blindness: It uses a harmless virus as a vector, or carrier, to bring DNA into the patient’s cells. In this case, the DNA should instruct the cells to make a coronavirus protein that would stimulate the immune system to fight off future infections.So far, the team has studied its vaccine candidates only in mice. Tests for safety and potency in monkeys should begin within a month or so at another academic center, the researchers said. But two of seven promising versions are already being manufactured for studies in humans.The research is one of at least 90 vaccine projects speeding ahead around the world in desperate efforts that hold the best and probably only hope of stopping or at least slowing the pandemic.“We are presenting a different angle from everybody else,” Dr. Luk H. Vandenberghe, director of the Grousbeck Gene Therapy Center at Massachusetts Eye and Ear, said in an interview.Their angle has several advantages, he said. One is that the type of vector, an adeno-associated virus, or AAV, is a harmless virus that is already used in two approved forms of gene therapy and has been tested in many patients and found to be safe.Another plus is that the technique requires very small amounts of the vector and DNA to produce immunity, so the yield of doses would be high, Dr. Vandenberghe said. Small amounts are enough because the vector is very good at getting into cells, which the DNA it carries transforms into factories that crank out the protein needed to put the immune system on alert against the coronavirus, he added.In addition, many drug and biotech companies, large and small, already produce adeno-associated virus and could easily switch to producing the form needed for the vaccine. New facilities would not have to be built from scratch. That means production could quickly be scaled up to help meet the huge and urgent global need for vaccine.“We are leaning on an established industry,” Dr. Vandenberghe said. “AAV as a class has had investments in the dozens of billions of dollars. There’s capacity out there that can be leveraged if we are lucky and successful.”The approved gene therapies that use adeno-associated viruses are Luxturna, for a form of hereditary blindness, and Zolgensma, for a lethal nerve disease, spinal muscular atrophy. The price of Luxturna is $425,000 per eye. It is made and sold in the United States by Spark Therapeutics, and sold overseas by Novartis. Zolgensma, made by Novartis, is given to young children as a one-time injection, at a price of $2.1 million.At this early stage, Dr. Vandenberghe estimates the manufacturing cost per dose of vaccine to be from $2.50 to $250.The research has the financial backing of donors, led by Wyc Grousbeck, lead owner of the Boston Celtics, his wife, Emilia Fazzalari, the chief executive of Cinco Spirits Group, and members of the Grousbeck family.Several other vaccine projects involve viral vectors, but no others use adeno-associated viruses.Hundreds of AAVs infect humans and other mammals. Researchers in gene therapy turned to them as a safer alternative after a patient died in a study in 1999 from a severe immune reaction to a different type of viral vector.For gene therapy, scientists sought adeno-associated viruses that would act as a sort of stealth carrier for DNA and not set off any inflammatory or immune response. They also tweaked the viruses genetically to prevent them from replicating inside human cells.Working at the University of Pennsylvania about 15 years ago, Dr. Vandenberghe created a hybrid AAV from two versions found in monkeys, for possible use in gene therapy. It was no good: It provoked an immune response.But that makes it a good candidate for a vaccine, because such a reaction can help stoke the immune system to fight the coronavirus. Many vaccines contain substances called adjuvants to help rev up the response to the vaccine itself. For this vaccine, the hybrid AAV may act not as only a vector, but also as an adjuvant.Dr. Mason Freeman, director and founder of the translational research center at the Massachusetts General Hospital, who is planning the human tests of the vaccine, said the researchers were hoping for just enough immune response to the AAV and not too much. But the hybrid vector has never been used in humans before, so there is still much to learn.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Like other vaccine projects, this one is focusing on the so-called spike on the coronavirus, which it uses to grab onto cells and invade them. In theory, if the immune system can be trained to make antibodies to block the spike, the virus will not be able to establish an infection.The DNA being carried by the vector holds directions for making a protein portion of the spike. Because it is not known which section of the spike is likely to set off the best immune response, researchers test DNA for different parts.One potential problem that every vaccine project will be on the lookout for is disease enhancement: the possibility that a vaccine, instead of preventing infection, could actually make the disease worse. Dr. Vandenberghe said his team was working with three other laboratories that would conduct tests to address this question.Disease enhancement has become a particular concern because all the vaccine projects are trying to move so much faster than usual that there is a fear the problem could go undetected, Dr. Freeman said. It is challenging to design studies to find it, particularly with a new disease that is not well understood.The two scientists said the many research groups forging ahead with vaccine projects were racing not against one another, but against the coronavirus.