At the Center of a Storm: The Search for a Proven Coronavirus Treatment
By Gina KolataOMAHA — Beginning every morning at 5:30, Dr. Andre Kalil makes himself a double espresso, runs 10 kilometers, makes additional double espressos for himself and his wife, and heads to his office at the University of Nebraska Medical Center.A deluge awaits him.Calls and insistent emails pile up each day. Patients and their doctors are clamoring for untested coronavirus treatments, encouraged by President Trump, who said that “we can’t wait” for rigorous studies of the anti-malarial drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, and that ill patients should have ready access to experimental medicines.Dr. Kalil, 54, is a principal investigator in the federal government’s clinical trial of drugs that may treat the coronavirus. It is starting with remdesivir, an antiviral drug. The first results will be ready within weeks.Dr. Kalil, who has decades of experience grappling with questions about the use — and misuse — of experimental drugs, has rarely been more frustrated. He has seen what happens when desperation drives treatment decisions. “Many drugs we believed were fantastic ended up killing people,” he said in an interview. “It is so hard to keep explaining that.”Dr. Kalil is haunted by memories of the Ebola outbreak that ravaged Africa from 2014 to 2016. Then, too, doctors said they could not wait for scientific evidence, and untested drugs were given to suffering Ebola patients by optimistic physicians with noble intentions. In the long run, none of the drugs was ever approved in the United States for treatment of the disease.Today, hope centers on chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. These drugs have been tested in the laboratory against many viruses: SARS and MERS — both coronaviruses — as well as H.I.V., dengue, Ebola, chikungunya and influenza. But even when they seemed to work, what succeeded in the test tube did not succeed in real life, Dr. Kalil said.In fact, the anti-malarial drugs have never been found to work against any viral disease, including Ebola. (Malaria is caused by a parasite, not a virus.) And the drugs have side effects, including damage to the liver and bone marrow, as well as heart rhythm disturbances that could be fatal in older people and young people with serious medical problems.Even worse, Dr. Kalil said, is the promotion of the antibiotic azithromycin in combination with the anti-malarial drugs to treat Covid-19 patients. Azithromycin also may cause serious heart rhythm problems, and the combination of drugs, Dr. Kalil said, has never been tested for safety in humans.That is not to say the drugs won’t help patients with the coronavirus, only that whether this is so is unknown.“This is very charged emotionally,” Dr. Kalil said. “It is Ebola déjà vu.”Dr. Kalil, an infectious disease and intensive care specialist, is a principal investigator in an unusual federal trial that may shape the course of the coronavirus pandemic.Every surface in his office at the University of Nebraska Medical Center is piled with stacks of papers and folders — these days, there is no time to clean up. His lunch, at 3 p.m. on a recent afternoon, consisted of a turkey wrap and a bottle of water from a mini refrigerator.Dr. Kalil is voluble, lean and energetic, an unabashed patriot whose family emigrated from Brazil decades ago. He can be confrontational, and has squared off with leading scientists when he feels their treatments cannot be justified by scientific evidence.He has participated in 22 marathons, and knows that now he is running in the most important race of all. As patients and the president alike demand treatments, he wants people to understand that testing is proceeding as quickly as possible.“At the risk of sounding clichéd,” said Dr. John Lowe, assistant vice chancellor at the medical center, Dr. Kalil is “the type of person who elevates a team through his demeanor and approach to research.”There is no vaccine and no treatment for Covid-19, the respiratory illness caused by the coronavirus. As of Thursday, the virus has infected 1.5 million people worldwide, at least 430,000 in the United States alone, where it has killed more than 14,500 people.Remdesivir, made by Gilead, was chosen to be the first treatment evaluated in the federal effort after investigators did a careful search for drugs that might be effective. It was designed to be a broad spectrum antiviral that stops the synthesis of genetic material in a variety of viruses.Laboratory and animal studies suggested that remdesivir might be effective against coronaviruses, and safety studies had already been conducted in animals. The drug also was tested in animals infected with MERS and SARS, both caused by coronaviruses.“We don’t know if remdesivir will get into the lungs in a high enough concentration to kill the virus,” Dr. Kalil said of its possible use to treat Covid-19. “We don’t know if it will cause side effects.”It is even possible that taking the drug may hasten patients’ deaths. “That is why we need a randomized controlled trial,” he said.Although remdesivir is not approved for treatment of any illness, Gilead provided the drug to Covid-19 patients under legal exceptions for “compassionate use.” But demand escalated to such an extent that the company announced last month that it would stop giving out the antiviral.“I would never give this or any other experimental drug off-label to my patients,” Dr. Kalil said. “There is nothing compassionate about compassionate use. You are treating emotion.”The problem is not just that an experimental drug may not work or may endanger patients. It is also that if a drug is distributed to patients far and wide, no one will ever know if it works.If a Covid-19 patient takes remdesivir or chloroquine and dies, did the drug fail? Was the patient too far gone? Did the drug actually hasten death?Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.If the patient survives, was it because of the drug? In spite of it? Without a controlled trial, there’s no good answer, and no way to compare patients once the drug is handed out routinely.The trial Dr. Kalil leads is not the only one testing remdesivir against the coronavirus. But it is the only trial with the rigor to show whether this or other drugs work in the American population.The research began in February with three patients who had been infected aboard the cruise ship Diamond Princess and were flown to the University of Nebraska Medical Center.About 400 patients are now enrolled at various sites, and with that number the trial has enough patients for a preliminary analysis, now underway, which will determine if the experiment should continue with remdesivir.In the usual clinical trial, one drug is tested against a control substance — placebo or the standard-of-care drug — for a set period of time. The investigators are not permitted to see the data.When the trial ends and the data is revealed, the researchers decide if the new drug is helpful. If it is not, the process must start over with a different drug. The experiments can take years.But Dr. Kalil is running a so-called adaptive trial. Researchers start by comparing an experimental drug — in this case, remdesivir — to the placebo. After a comparatively short period of time, they peek at the data.If patients taking remdesivir are faring better than those taking the placebo, the study will move on to a second phase in which another drug is tested against remdesivir, which becomes the trial’s control.The point is to find something that shows some efficacy quickly, and there is no specific stopping point.If a drug were to bring the mortality rate to zero, of course, the trial would end abruptly and that drug would become the standard of care. If a drug were shown to halve the mortality rate, however, the question gets trickier.“Is that good enough?” Dr. Kalil wondered.He declined to say which drugs are in line for testing after remdesivir, concerned that he might set off another wave of demand for unproven drugs.In addition to criticizing the demand for the drug under compassionate use, Dr. Kalil also lamented publication of case studies in prestigious medical journals of single patients who took an untested drug.“Publishing a single case report of an experimental drug as an original article in a high-impact journal during an outbreak is akin to sensationalist news,” he said.