What Made New York So Hospitable for Coronavirus?
By Gina KolataPerhaps it was inevitable that New York City and its suburbs would become an epicenter of the coronavirus epidemic in the United States. The population density, reliance on public transportation and constant influx of tourists — all would seem to make the metropolitan area a target.But to stop the virus, scientists have to figure out which factors played a greater role than others. As it turns out, that is not so simple.“We have more speculation than facts,” said Dr. Arnold Monto, professor of epidemiology and global health at the University of Michigan.More than 20,000 New York City residents have tested positive for the virus so far — nearly a third of all confirmed cases in the nation. The prevalence in New York and the areas close to it is far greater than anywhere else in the country.The problem is that so little is known about the spread of this new virus that it is hard to draw conclusions about whether New York is unique or a harbinger of things to come elsewhere.There was almost certainly an early and undetected introduction of the virus into the city, probably in mid- to late January, said Benjamin Cowling, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the University of Hong Kong.“Many of the cases being detected in the past week are the result of that slow process that has built up over two months,” he said.With many viral diseases, scientists can get a sense of the exact timing by comparing the mutations in the virus from samples taken at various times. But human coronaviruses are surprisingly stable, said Dr. Paul Offit, an infectious disease expert at the University of Pennsylvania and Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.Once in the area, New York’s density played some role in its rapid spread but was probably not the whole story, epidemiologists said. Many New Yorkers live in high rises. Sidewalks are crowded. Subways can be jammed. The city has 27,000 residents per square mile, far surpassing the second densest city, San Francisco, with 18,000 per mile.But, noted Jon Zelner, an epidemiologist at the University of Michigan, other cities such as Tokyo, Seoul, and Taipei also are very dense and have not seen the same kind of explosive growth.The extraordinary number of cases might reflect a high level of coronavirus testing. New York City seems to be testing more aggressively than many other places, Dr. Zelner said.Maybe, others said, the age structure in the city — the many older people who live close together — played a role. At first, only those with typical coronavirus symptoms were being tested. Older people seem more likely to get very ill with the virus and show symptoms. New York might have more confirmed cases in part because of the age group it was testing.Could the effect be at least in part explained as a statistical fluke, like cancer clusters that can look ominous but turn out to be random?Chance may play some role in situations like this, said Donald Berry, a statistician at MD Anderson Cancer center. What matters, he says, is not the number of cases but the clusters.Suppose an executive on Wall Street was infected early in the epidemic and exposed a group of others by shaking hands. It was the start of a cluster that ballooned out as each person infected others. Suppose that at the same time an actor on Broadway was infected and started another cluster. And a patient in a nursing home started yet another cluster. The number of cases can start to explode.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Analyzing spread is not a case by case situation, Dr. Berry said. It is a cluster by cluster issue.“When you see a case you see a lot of cases,” Dr. Berry said. The number of cases becomes the cluster size times the number of clusters. In New York, he added, “it all comes together to spell a very bad picture.”A detailed county map shows the extent of the coronavirus outbreak, with tables of the number of cases by county.Clusters also can contribute to what looks like random rapid spread of the virus.Suppose 100 infected New Yorkers fly to other cities. Clusters can start in the cities where they landed. Other cities will escape because the infected people did not go there.Dr. Monto pointed to unexpected aspects of the virus’s spread.It took off in a region of Italy with small cities, not in the larger more crowded areas. And when those regions were closed off, many people fled to the south. Yet even though the coronavirus undoubtedly was introduced to southern Italy, so far there have been relatively few deaths. “It is nothing like what you see in the north,” Dr. Monto said.The west coast of the United States also is puzzling, he added. Los Angeles and San Francisco “must have had multiple introductions” of the virus, he said. But the California cases have been concentrated in the Silicon Valley area and are nowhere near as numerous as the cases in Seattle.“There are no answers,” Dr. Monto said.