No More Than 10 People in One Place, Trump Said. But Why?
By Knvul SheikhAs the new coronavirus continues to spread, state and local governments are shutting down schools and businesses and setting limits on the sizes of public gatherings. The latest recommendation announced Monday by the federal government to promote social distancing and limit the transmission of the coronavirus: no more than 10 people in one place.“We’d much rather be ahead of the curve than behind it,” President Trump said at a White House news conference. “Therefore, my administration is recommending that all Americans, including the young and healthy, work to engage in schooling from home when possible, avoid gathering in groups of more than 10 people, avoid discretionary travel and avoid eating and drinking at bars, restaurants and public food courts.”But where did that number come from? The variations in crowd size requirements and recommendations from assorted government authorities may add to confusion about what people should do to protect themselves and prevent transmission of disease.“It feels like somebody is using a Magic 8-Ball to make these decisions,” said Kelly Hills, a bioethicist and co-founder of the consulting firm Rogue Bioethics. “There is no consistency. There doesn’t even seem to be consistency in who’s making these decisions.”Size limits for group gatherings in public and private settings have varied widely over the past week.St. Louis banned gatherings as large as 1,000 on Thursday.As recently as Sunday, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended that events consisting of 50 people or more be canceled or postponed for the next eight weeks.Gov. Charlie Baker of Massachusetts prohibited gatherings of over 25 people on Sunday.On the same day, officials in San Mateo County, Calif., reduced their recommendation to 10 people while officially banning crowds of 50 or more.That change came at a time when California state officials had declared 250 as the ceiling for gatherings.Social distancing is a broad category of precautions that includes standing approximately six feet from others when possible, not shaking hands, applying self-quarantine or isolation for individuals who feel sick and avoiding mass gatherings. These precautions can help slow the spread of infections and cases of the sick pouring into hospitals that could potentially overwhelm their capacity to care for those who need help.Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus response director, said during Monday’s news conference that the federal recommendation of no more than 10 was reached because officials had been working with researchers modeling the spread of the virus.“The most important thing was if one person in the household became infected, the whole household self-quarantined for 14 days because that stops 100 percent of the transmission outside of the household,” Dr. Birx said, without offering more detail about how they reached the number 10.One study from researchers at Imperial College London predicted that without action to stem the spread, the virus could cause more than two million deaths in the United States. It suggested that the most effective way to avert that outcome was to limit interactions between people for a period of time.But there is no standard or scientific definition of what a mass gathering of people is, said Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. And scientists who have studied the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic and more recent outbreaks have not found strong evidence that restricting mass gatherings alone is effective in controlling an outbreak, Dr. Osterholm said.In addition to the size of a gathering, public health experts may consider factors such as the density of people in one place when making recommendations on social distancing, Dr. Osterholm said.Events where people congregate in a small space may increase the opportunity for person-to-person transmission of the virus. Gatherings that last for longer periods of time, such as rallies, concerts or conferences, may also increase the opportunities for transmission compared with brief encounters that may occur at a pharmacy or a grocery store. That is why the context of the gathering may be more important than the actual number of people in some situations.“What is proper social distancing for a major metropolitan city with sustained community acquired transmission is going to be different from a sleepy farming community,” Ms. Hills said. “You wouldn’t want to just one-size things.”The prevalence of a pathogen in the community is another important factor to consider. If a pathogen is extremely widespread, then it makes sense to limit gatherings to much smaller numbers, Dr. Osterholm said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“If 20 percent of the population is infected, you can have one meeting with 10 people in it and pretty well assume that there will be someone there who can transmit the virus,” Dr. Osterholm said. Because of a lack of testing, it is not yet clear what portion of the population is infected with the coronavirus.Does that mean it’s safe to have up to 10 people in your home for a dinner party, a book club meeting or some other small gathering?The safest thing to do for the moment would be to cancel such plans, or perhaps shift them to videoconferencing.And for those who go forward with guests, it is important to consider whether anyone in the household or among the invited guests may be elderly or have underlying health conditions. Research suggests that individuals in these categories are more likely to catch an infection, and they may develop more severe disease if they get sick.Family-style meals and open buffets should be avoided in any case.“You might want to have one person in charge of dishing out all of the plates, rather than each person going in and interacting with the food,” Ms. Hills said.