Coronavirus May Keep California’s Nursing Students From Graduating
By Emma GoldbergFor Sharon Goldfarb, a nurse educator in California, crisis care is second nature: She worked at a Harlem H.I.V. clinic during the AIDS epidemic, at ground zero after Sept. 11 and in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. When the coronavirus outbreak began to spread, she was ready to prepare her 85 nursing students for front-line care, if necessary.Then the calls came from local hospitals: They no longer wanted nursing students to come for clinical rotations, primarily because of public health advisories on limiting the spread of the virus. Not only would her students be unable to help — most would not be able to graduate on time.The United States is facing a nursing shortfall, and California will be especially hard hit; the state’s vacancy rate for registered nurses is now above 4 percent. The coronavirus will place a tremendous strain on already understaffed hospitals. Yet a growing number of hospitals are discontinuing clinical rotations for the state’s nursing students. The California Board of Registered Nursing requires that 75 percent of a nursing student’s clinical education be completed with patient contact during hospital rotations. Dr. Goldfarb, dean of health sciences at College of Marin, said that if the state did not change that requirement or encourage hospitals to find clinical roles for nursing students, there would be few nursing students graduating in the coming months.“They’re trying to marshal the resources they have as wisely as they can,” Dr. Goldfarb said of the nursing schools’ clinical partners. “They’re working with limited resources, in people and supplies.” Still, she added, “We’re looking at 14,000 nursing students not graduating in the time of most dire need I’ve seen in my years as a professional nurse. It’s incredibly shortsighted.”For their part, the facilities that typically take in nursing students are scrambling to protect the health of their patients and work force. “In accordance with directives from county and state officials, we have restricted all nonessential personnel from our inpatient facilities, which includes students in clinical nursing rotations,” said Anna Kiger, chief nurse officer at the North California health system Sutter Health. She added that some student involvement in ambulatory settings could be arranged, with proper precautions.A spokesman for Kaiser Permanente, another clinical partner for the nursing schools, said that all of the decisions they had made were meant “to limit the spread of the virus to our members, staff and the public.”California’s nursing students, for their part, are frustrated that their hands are tied as the number of coronavirus cases rises. “We see all the posts about staffing shortages, and I’m sitting at home thinking I could be helping,” said Sarah Joseph, 27, a nursing student in the health sciences department at the College of Marin who was supposed to graduate in May. “The nurses in clinical settings are on the front lines and we desperately want to be with them, because that’s what we went into nursing to do. But we’re being pushed out.”In a letter last week to Gov. Gavin Newsom, the deans of several nursing schools called on California to temporarily lift the rule requiring 75 percent in-person care and instead allow nursing students to complete their graduation requirements through 50 percent simulations, which use mannequins, videos and online platforms for training.“With swift and temporary action, we can keep California’s nursing students on track and prevent a decline in the overall number of registered nurses in our state,” wrote Robyn Nelson, dean of the College of Nursing at West Coast University. Dr. Nelson has had more than 3,600 nursing students displaced by the clinical policy change; she said the temporary rule change can be enacted through use of the governor’s emergency powers.On Sunday, California nursing students released a petition on Change.org asking the Board of Registered Nursing to “find an alternate solution” to clinical hour requirements; it has gathered more than 43,000 signatories so far.A spokesman for the California Department of Consumer Affairs said on Wednesday that the department and the nursing board “are monitoring the situation and are looking into various options,” adding, “To date, we are still bound by our regulation.”Donna Meyer, chief executive officer of the Organization for Associate Degree Nursing, said that allowing nursing students to temporarily meet requirements through simulations was a simple solution, and desperately needed. A 2014 study from the National Council of State Boards of Nursing found that substituting 50 percent of clinical experience with simulations had no significant effect on “knowledge acquisition and clinical performance.”But many nursing students and educators are not just calling for a change in licensing requirements; they also want to return to rotations, to provide clinical assistance where possible as hospital intake surges. In a survey of nursing students at the College of Marin this week, 85 percent of respondents reported that they would be willing to provide front-line care throughout the coronavirus outbreak.Ms. Joseph, the nursing student, was scheduled this spring to complete her preceptorship in labor and delivery, which is now canceled. Her disappointment at the delayed graduation quickly turned to frustration. She said that she could play a useful role at a clinic without directly treating coronavirus patients — helping the triage nurses take patient vitals, distributing masks, assisting with screening questions, communicating with patients’ families and visitors. Instead, she is in her apartment, wondering when she will be able to return to work.Paige Hilt, 24, another nursing student in California, was set to graduate in May. “Of course it’s scary, but as nurses we encounter people with different illnesses all the time,” she said. “We don’t know how bad this is going to get, and we need as many people as possible. Not to mention a lot of nurses are older, and what happens when they get sick?”Joanne Spetz, a professor at the Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies at the University of California, San Francisco, said her research indicated that patient numbers would far outstrip hospital staff capacity in the coming months, as coronavirus cases continue to rise. There are nearly four million registered nurses in the United States, but only 20 percent work in critical care. More nurses will need to be freed to move into intensive care units, meaning others will need to be ready to take their places.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Dr. Spetz said that states and nurse licensing boards should be preparing by easing licensing requirements for registered nurses who need to cross state lines, and ensuring medical workers have emergency child care. In the meantime, the need is simple: to prepare as many nurses and nursing students as possible to help.“Students of all health professions have knowledge and training already,” Dr. Spetz said. “There are going to be many roles they’ll be useful in as we rapidly deploy in an emergency.”Each day on her way to the office, Dr. Goldfarb passes a poster with the face of a smiling World War I nurse. “Wanted: 20,000 nurses,” it reads. A sense of duty is ingrained in the nursing profession, she said. Even during the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic, student nurses were called to hospitals to care for the ill.