Christian Health Sharing Group Is Target of Customer Lawsuits
By Reed AbelsonA major Christian group is being sued by former customers in at least three states who claim it sold them an alternative to health insurance that misled them about protections against large medical bills.Numerous insurance regulators, including in New York, are trying to stop the group from offering the plans in their states.The most recent lawsuit, filed last week in federal court in Missouri, accuses Trinity Healthshare, the Christian group, and Aliera, the for-profit company that markets the plans, for having “sold inherently unfair and deceptive health care plans to Missouri residents, and failed to provide them with the coverage the purchasers believed they would receive.”The plans were developed “to look and feel like health insurance that would provide meaningful coverage for the purchasers’ health care needs,” according to the lawsuit.Earlier this month, New York State wrote a cease-and-desist letter to the companies. Nearly 8,000 New Yorkers are currently enrolled in the group’s plans, and regulators are concerned that the coronavirus crisis could lead people who recently lost insurance when they lost their job to pick one of these plans rather than find one through the state insurance marketplace or enroll in Medicaid.“Trinity, Aliera and its subsidiaries continue to operate in New York without a license, depriving New Yorkers of important benefits when they are most needed,” said Linda A. Lacewell, the state’s superintendent of financial services, in a statement. “The department will use all the tools at its disposal to crack down on those who mislead or deceive New Yorkers, especially during a pandemic.”Both Trinity and Aliera say there is no confusion about what they are offering. Trinity says its Christian health-sharing ministry programs “are not insurance, and prospective and current members are advised expressly and repeatedly that Trinity neither provides insurance nor guarantees payments.”Aliera says its marketing materials “make a point of stating very clearly that these programs are absolutely not insurance.”“With health insurance premiums and unemployment skyrocketing, as well as the ever-present threat of Covid-19, it’s deeply disturbing and disappointing to see any state regulator working to deny their residents access to the affordable health care options that health care sharing ministries offer,” the company said in a statement.More than one million Americans have joined Christian groups in which they agree to share their medical expenses with other members. People are attracted by prices that are far lower than the cost of traditional insurance policies, which must meet strict requirements set by the Affordable Care Act, like guaranteed coverage for pre-existing conditions.The Christian groups can offer low rates because they are not classified as insurance, and are under no legal obligation to pay medical claims. Some people have paid hundreds of dollars a month, and then have been left with hundreds of thousands in unpaid medical bills in several states where the ministries, which are not subject to regulation as insurers, failed to follow through on pooling members’ expenses.With millions of Americans now without health insurance because they lost their jobs, critics of these plans worry they will turn to these alternatives without realizing they do not provide adequate protection.In the current environment, “people will be desperate for health coverage, and they might sign up for things that look at first blush like a cheap deal,” said Eleanor Hamburger whose firm, Sirianni Youtz Spoonemore Hamburger, brought the three lawsuits and is seeking class-action status for them.“We’ve fielded calls about Aliera from all over the country,” she said.In an interview, George T. Kelly III, the Missouri man bringing the suit against Trinity and Aliera, said he and his wife were looking for plans when an insurance agent told them he “had a good deal for us.” In 2018, he signed up for the plan and paid “contributions” of $344 a month. But he discovered that the plan would not pay for any of his medical claims, including hernia surgery.“They were just denying it,” he said. Mr. Kelly eventually went to an out-of-state surgery center where he could pay cash.Jay Angoff, a former federal health official and state insurance regulator who is one of the lawyers representing Mr. Kelly, said people are being misled by Aliera and Trinity. “On the one hand, they state, sometimes in small print, that they’re not insurance,” he said. “On the other hand, they convey the impression they are insurance.”“They avoid any kind of state insurance department regulation,” which would make sure they have enough money to pay members’ claims, he said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Unlike an A.C.A. plan that must spend 80 cents of every dollar collected in premiums on medical expenses, these plans spend a much smaller fraction, Mr. Angoff said. In its 2019 final investigative report, Washington State found less than 20 cents per dollar was being reserved for members’ medical expenses, with the overwhelming portion of the money going to Aliera.Aliera says members are responsible for sharing one another’s costs and share much more than 20 percent of the expenses.“The vast majority of Trinity members are very satisfied with Trinity’s ministry, and continue to choose Trinity as a cost-effective means for sharing medical expenses,” the Christian group said.Like Washington, numerous states have taken action against Aliera. The company, which is based in Georgia, was the subject of an investigation by The Houston Chronicle. The Texas attorney general sued Aliera last year to stop it from offering “unregulated insurance products to the public,” and several regulators, including those in Colorado, Connecticut and Washington, followed suit.