‘At War With No Ammo’: Doctors Say Shortage of Protective Gear Is Dire
By Andrew Jacobs, Matt Richtel and Mike BakerThe Open Cities Community Health Center in St. Paul, Minn., is considering shutting down because it doesn’t have enough face masks. Doctors at Barnes Jewish Hospital in St. Louis are performing invasive procedures on coronavirus patients with loose fitting surgical masks rather than the tight respirator masks recommended by health agencies. At a Los Angeles emergency room, doctors were given a box of expired masks, and when they tried to put them on, the elastic bands snapped.With coronavirus cases soaring, doctors, nurses and other front-line medical workers across the United States are confronting a dire shortage of masks, surgical gowns and eye gear to protect them from the virus.transcriptI would just say enjoy your home. Stay. I would just say, right now. We have to get this problem fixed. Welcome to Miami!In interviews, doctors said they were increasingly anxious, fearing they could expose not only themselves to the virus, but their families and others.“There’s absolutely no way to protect myself,” said Dr. Faezah A. Bux, an anesthesiologist in central Kentucky who in recent days had to intubate several elderly patients in respiratory distress without the respirator masks and protective eye gear recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Not only can I not protect myself, I can’t protect my patients.”At a White House briefing on Thursday, President Trump said millions of masks were in production and that the federal government had made efforts to address the shortages, though he did not provide details. But he said it was largely up to governors to deal with the problem.“The federal government’s not supposed to be out there buying vast amounts of items and then shipping,” Mr. Trump said. “You know, we’re not a shipping clerk.”While doctors grappled with supply problems, the State Department advised Americans who are abroad to either come home now or plan to stay overseas until the pandemic is under control. In Italy, the death toll is now more than 3,400, a higher number of fatalities than even in China.In the United States, the number of reported cases grew to more than 11,000 on Thursday, as Senate Republicans released a plan that would provide checks of up to $1,200 for many taxpayers and Gov. Gavin Newsom of California issued an order that state residents “stay at home.”The president also said there were no immediate plans to address medical equipment shortages by activating the Defense Production Act, a Korean War-era law that authorizes presidents to take extraordinary action to force American industry to ramp up production of equipment needed for national security.“We hope we are not going to need it,” he said.The president’s optimistic statements contrasted starkly with the situation on the ground, particularly in Washington and New York, the states with the largest number of coronavirus cases. Earlier this week, administrators informed doctors at Memorial Sloan Kettering in Manhattan that they were down to one-week supply of respirator masks, but working to get more, according to a physician familiar with the situation. Rebecca Bartles, who heads infection prevention efforts for the Providence St. Joseph hospital chain based in Washington, said it was only a matter of days before some of the system’s 51 hospitals and 800 clinics run out of personal protective equipment — a situation that imperils the nation’s ability to respond to a pandemic still in its early stages.“We’re on mile one of a marathon,” she said, adding, “what does mile 25 look like?” Health care workers’ fears are not abstract. Two emergency room doctors in New Jersey and Washington have been hospitalized in critical condition, dozens of other health care workers across the country have already fallen ill and hundreds have been forced into quarantine.“We are at war with no ammo,” said a surgeon in Fresno, Calif., who said she had no access to even the most basic surgical masks in her outpatient clinic and has a limited supply of the tight-fitting respirator masks in the operating room. Like many doctors interviewed, she asked not to be quoted by name, worried about retribution from administrators for speaking out.Federal health officials say respirator masks can be used for eight hours of continuous or intermittent use and should be discarded after treating an infected patient. Many doctors around the country said they are being given just one, to use indefinitely, and they spray it down with Lysol or wipe it off, not knowing whether that will help preserve it.Many doctors and nurses say their fears and frustrations have been compounded by guidance from the C.D.C. that they consider unclear and misleading. Recently it changed its guidance to say that regular surgical masks are “an acceptable alternative” when examining or treating a coronavirus patient. The change came given the shortages of the special N95 respirator masks. They get their name because they can filter out 95 percent of all airborne particles when used correctly.The agency says that such masks remain essential for doctors during intubations, which involve inserting a breathing tube down a patient’s throat. It is a procedure that can more easily spread disease.While some infectious disease doctors defend the guidelines — noting that surgical masks and protective eyewear are sufficient for everyday patient exchanges — others argue the new recommendations are borne of political expediency instead of science. The American Nurses Association said the guidelines were creating confusion among its members over how to stay safe.“We are concerned that C.D.C. recommendations are based solely on supply chain and manufacturing challenges,” the association said in a letter to Congress. “It’s also concerning that these recommendations do not offer strategies to address the limited manufacturing and supply chain of necessary personal protective equipment.”In an email, the agency acknowledged the shortages, but did not respond to questions about doctors’ concerns over its guidance.Howard K. Mell, a spokesman for the American College of Emergency Physicians, said the crisis requires decisive federal action. He urged the White House to ramp up production of medical gear through the Defense Production Act powers, and he called on federal authorities to increase distributions from the Strategic National Stockpile, a repository of critical medical supplies for public health emergencies.The stockpile has roughly 12 million N95 masks and 30 million surgical masks. The Department of Heath and Human Services, which oversees the stockpile, did not return emails requesting information about the supplies. The department has estimated that the country would need 3.5 billion masks in the event of a pandemic lasting a year.A cache of several thousand face masks and other gear from the stockpile recently arrived in Oregon and Washington. Officials in both states said it was far less than what they had requested.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“If this is a wartime situation, then now is the time to act,” said Dr. Mell, who is an emergency room doctor in Illinois.In recent days, Dr. Mell said he felt helpless as he fielded desperate calls from emergency room doctors across the country. On Tuesday, he was surprised to find 10 boxes of respirator masks typically used by construction workers at a local Target store. With certain construction masks temporarily approved for medical use by the F.D.A., he bought the entire supply and is sending half of them to a doctor in the Bronx whose hospital has completely run out.“Why on God’s green earth can I go to Target and buy these items when so many hospitals are running out?” he asked. “If they are available at Target, there are certainly more sitting at a distribution center somewhere. We need these in our hospitals right now.”Several large hospital chains said they had adequate supplies for now, though they have taken steps to ration their use. The George Washington University Hospital in Washington, D.C., has told heath care workers they can use a respirator mask five times before discarding it, and it is keeping its supply of masks under lock and key.“We’ve experienced outright theft, with the general public walking into our building and walking right out,” said Bruno Petinaux, the hospital’s chief medical officer.Smaller hospitals and nonprofit clinics, especially those that lack centralized supply operations, are moving aggressively to conserve their gear. In an effort to save precious supplies, Chatham Hospital in Siler City, N.C., is only allowing one doctor and one nurse to examine patients with symptoms of respiratory distress.Some hospitals are employing more heavy-handed tactics. Saint Peter’s Healthcare System in New Jersey on Wednesday warned doctors in an email they could be disciplined for wearing masks when not examining patients.On Thursday, volunteers with knives, rulers and masking tape gathered at the headquarters of Providence St. Joseph Health to cobble together face shields for the system’s thousands of caregivers. In Oregon, health officials in Multnomah County are calling on the public to donate any rubber gloves, goggles or face masks they might have at home or work. The county, which includes Portland, has little more than a week before critical supplies run out.“Every pandemic is local so you have to pull on those local strings so we can help each other,” said Julie Sullivan-Springhetti, a health department spokesperson.But with limited prospects for speedy government intervention, fear and anxiety continue to mount. In recent days, hundreds of medical workers have taken to social media with public pleas for help using the hashtag #GetMePPE. (P.P.E. stands for personal protective equipment.)A doctor at Barnes-Jewish Hospital in St. Louis described how she and her colleagues intubated a trauma patient they later discovered was likely infected with Covid-19. All of them wore simple face masks as they worked just inches from the patient’s face.“I’m terrified,” she said, her voice cracking with emotion as she ended her shift. “I feel like it’s only a matter of time before I’m infected with this illness.”