Surfaces? Sneezes? Sex? How the Coronavirus Can and Cannot Spread
By Heather Murphy[This article is part of the developing coronavirus coverage, and may be outdated. Go here for the latest on the coronavirus.]A delicate but highly contagious virus, roughly one-900th the width of a human hair, is spreading from person to person around the world. The coronavirus, as it’s known, has already infected more than 200,000 people in 140 countries.Because this virus is so new, experts’ understanding of how it spreads is limited. They can, however, offer some guidance about how it does — and does not — seem to be transmitted.You walk into a crowded grocery store. A shopper has the coronavirus. What puts you most at risk of getting infected by that person?Experts agree they have a great deal to learn, but four factors are likely to play some role: how close you get; how long you are near the person; whether that person projects viral droplets on you; and how much you touch your face. (Of course, your age and health are also major factors.) Also, the larger the number of people in the store — or in any other situation — the greater the chance that you’ll cross paths with an infected person, which is why so many health officials are now urging people to avoid crowds and to cancel gatherings large and small.It is a droplet containing viral particles. A virus is a tiny codependent microbe that attaches to a cell, takes over, makes more of itself and moves on to its next host. This is its “lifestyle,” said Gary Whittaker, a professor of virology at the Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine.A “naked” virus can’t go anywhere unless it’s hitching a ride with a droplet of mucus or saliva, said Kin-on Kwok, a professor at the Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.These mucus and saliva droplets are ejected from the mouth or the nose as we cough, sneeze, laugh, sing, breathe and talk. If they don’t hit something along the way, they typically land on the floor or the ground. When the virus becomes suspended in droplets smaller than five micrometers — known as aerosols — it can stay suspended for about a half-hour, research suggests. To gain access to your cells, the viral droplets must enter through the eyes, the nose or the mouth. Some experts believe that sneezing and coughing are most likely the primary forms of transmission. Professor Kwok said talking face-to-face or sharing a meal with someone could pose a risk.Julian Tang, a virologist and a professor at the University of Leicester in England who is researching the coronavirus with Professor Kwok, agreed.“If you can smell what someone had for lunch — garlic, curry, etc. — you are inhaling what they are breathing out, including any virus in their breath,” he said. The virus does not linger in the air at high enough levels to be a risk to most people. But the techniques health care workers use to care for sick people can generate high levels of aerosols. This is part of why it’s so important that they have proper protective equipment.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends keeping a distance of six feet from other people to minimize the possibility of infection. (A useful way to think about six feet is that it’s roughly twice the length of the average person’s extended arm.) Three feet is the distance the W.H.O. emphasizes as particularly risky when standing near a person who is coughing or sneezing. Still, other public health experts say that at this crucial moment, when the world still has an opportunity to slow the transmission of the coronavirus, any number of feet is too close. By cutting out all but essential in-person interactions, we can help flatten the curve, they say, keeping the number of sick people to levels that medical providers can manage. It’s not yet clear, but most experts agree that more time equals more risk.Not necessarily. Fever, coughing, chest pain and shortness of breath may signal that someone has been infected with the coronavirus. (Covid-19 is the name for the disease caused by the virus.)But it has become increasingly clear that people without symptoms can also infect others. In some cases, these people may later feel terrible enough to try to get tested, isolate themselves, seek treatment and notify friends and colleagues about potential risk. In still other cases, people with the virus may never experience the physical discomfort that would tip them off to the fact that they have been a danger to others. Yes. After numerous people who attended a Buddhist temple in Hong Kong fell ill, the city’s Center for Health Protection collected samples from the site. Restroom faucets and the cloth covers over Buddhist texts tested positive for the coronavirus, the agency said.This coronavirus is just the latest of many similarly shaped viruses. (Coronaviruses are named for the spikes that protrude from their surfaces, which resemble a crown or the sun’s corona.) A recent study of the novel coronavirus found that it could live for three days on plastic and steel. If you are ordering lots of supplies online, you may be relieved to know that the virus did poorly on cardboard — it disintegrated over the course of a day. It survived for about four hours on copper. Whether a surface looks dirty or clean is irrelevant. If an infected person sneezed and a droplet landed on a surface, a person who then touched that surface could pick it up. How much is required to infect a person is unclear.But as long as you wash your hands before touching your face, you should be OK, because viral droplets don’t pass through skin.Also, coronaviruses are relatively easy to destroy. Using a simple disinfectant on a surface is nearly guaranteed to break the delicate envelope that surrounds the tiny microbe, rendering it harmless, Professor Whittaker said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.No, several experts said.There is no evidence that viral particles can go through walls or glass, said Dr. Ashish K. Jha, director of the Harvard Global Health Institute.He said he was more concerned about the dangers posed by common spaces than those posed by vents, provided there is good air circulation in a room.An infected neighbor might sneeze on a railing and if you touched it, “that would be a more natural way to get it from your neighbor,” he said.Kissing could definitely spread it, several experts said.Though coronaviruses are not typically sexually transmitted, it’s too soon to know, the W.H.O. said.If a sick person handles the food or it’s a high-traffic buffet, then risks cannot be ruled out — but heating or reheating food should kill the virus, Professor Whittaker said.Dr. Jha concurred.“As a general rule, we haven’t seen that food is a mechanism for spreading,” he said.Thousands of people have already begun various types of quarantines. Some have been mandated by health officials, while others are voluntary and primarily involve staying home.Can a cat or dog join someone to make quarantine less lonely?Professor Whittaker, who has studied the spread of coronaviruses in animals and humans, said that he had seen no evidence that people who have the virus could be a danger to their pets.