Did Federal Officials Really Question W.H.O. Tests for Coronavirus?
By Donald G. McNeil Jr.At a time when the Trump administration is facing intense criticism for its failure to make coronavirus tests available to millions of nervous Americans, remarks by a federal health official on Tuesday appeared to suggest that the World Health Organization’s diagnostic tests were wildly inaccurate.In a somewhat rambling answer to a question related to W.H.O. tests, Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, said: “It doesn’t help to put out a test where 50 percent or 47 percent were false positives. Imagine what that would mean to the American people. Imagine what that would mean to tell someone they were positive when they weren’t.”It was not clear where Dr. Birx got those figures, but obviously such an inaccurate test would be worthless. Late on Tuesday night, Dr. Birx confirmed that although she was responding to a question about the W.H.O. test, she was referring to a study of an early diagnostic test used in China.The paper found that, in a specific subset of those tested in China — asymptomatic contacts of known cases — the tests wrongly found them to be positive 47 percent of the time.But there have been no suggestions that the W.H.O. test, distributed worldwide, has such significant accuracy problems. On Tuesday night, Dr. Birx said she has not looked into the W.H.O. test, “but I assume it is functional.”Dr. Birx was asked several questions by reporters about the lack of tests during the news conference, and came and went to the microphone several times.Early on, she was asked a question that the administration has struggled to deal with: If federal officials have shipped millions of tests, as White House officials have said several times, why have only 60,000 Americans been tested?Dr. Birx answered that tests in the United States were now being made by many producers, which is correct. Differing diagnostic tests are now made by state laboratories, medical school laboratories and private companies like Thermo Fisher, which she mentioned as an example.Dr. Birx said she was strongly urging commercial providers to get their tests out, but of course, they first had to prove to the Food and Drug Administration that they were of high quality.Later, she was asked about a criticism made by former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. in Monday’s night’s debate. He said the W.H.O. had “offered tests to the United States but we didn’t buy them.”In her answer, she did not refer to the W.H.O. tests at all, but said, “We don’t buy tests that haven’t been quality-controlled and they show us the data," then adding that a test with high rates of inaccuracy would be a disaster.A spokeswoman for the W.H.O. said she did not know what Dr. Birx was referring to, but the agency had been supplying kits to member nations since January.The accuracy of the test was validated by three laboratories before it was rolled out, the spokeswoman said, and it had consistently showed “good performance in laboratory and clinical use, and neither a significant number of false positive nor false negative results have been reported.”In any case, Mr. Biden’s assertion that the Trump administration refused tests offered by the W.H.O. appears to be wrong. The W.H.O. does not sell tests to wealthy countries, which usually prefer to make their own.Dr. Anne Schuchat, deputy principal director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, confirmed that the W.H.O. gave test kits “primarily to underresourced countries.” Another administration official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, confirmed that the W.H.O. had never offered to sell or give tests to the United States.China, Hong Kong, France, Germany, Thailand and the United States have all designed their own tests, according to the W.H.O. website. Each one looks for the presence of two or three short stretches of viral genes.For example, the C.D.C’s test looks at three targets on the N gene, while the tests ordered by the W.H.O. look at bits of the N gene, the RdRP gene and the E gene. Each gene performs a different function in helping the virus break into cells, hijack their DNA machinery and reproduce million of copies of itself.For countries that are unable to make the tests or buy them from other countries, the W.H.O. asks academic or government laboratories to make tests.It then delivers them to poor and middle-income countries at low or no cost, paying for them out of emergency funds or loans from institutions like the World Bank.The test ordered by the W.H.O. was designed in a lab run by Dr. Christian Drosten at the medical school of Berlin’s Charity Hospital, which is considered one of the world’s top genomic laboratories.According to a detailed description of the test posted on the W.H.O. website, in its initial rollout, it was accurate 100 percent of the time.In a Feb. 21 email, another W.H.O. spokesman said the test’s accuracy had been verified by three other laboratories before it was sent to a German diagnostics company for manufacturing. There had been no problems with the first shipment of 250,000 doses, he said.Dr. Michael Mina, an assistant professor of epidemiology at the Harvard School of Public Health, said both the W.H.O. test and the initial C.D.C. tests were “exceptional” in their accuracy.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The problems with the C.D.C. test have been attributed to flaws in the manufacturing of reagents for kits, not in the C.D.C.’s design.No test is accurate 100 percent of the time, but the errors are usually introduced by medical personnel who fail to take samples correctly or lab personnel who run the test incorrectly or accidentally contaminate it with stray DNA.For example, in February an American passenger released from the cruise ship Westerdam, which went from port to port for many days before Cambodia allowed it to dock, tested positive for the virus as she passed through Malaysia, setting off a crisis.The C.D.C. later said she did not have the virus and judged the Malaysian test to be a likely false positive.Since Malaysia did not have its own test, it presumably used the W.H.O.’s. But Malaysia does not have a top-quality lab, and many labs make initial errors when they are rolling out a new test.