Even Without Symptoms, Wuhan Coronavirus May Spread, Experts Fear
By Roni Caryn RabinCan individuals infected with the Wuhan coronavirus spread it to others even if they aren’t showing symptoms?It’s one of the most important questions confronting scientists. If even asymptomatic people can spread the virus, then it will be much, much harder to slow its spread.Doctors in China claimed asymptomatic transmission was possible, and a letter published Jan. 30 in the New England Journal of Medicine appeared to back them up.In the letter, scientists described a cluster of infections in Germany that had started with a traveler from Shanghai. The traveler had seemed healthy during her four-day visit to Bavaria, the researchers reported, and started feeling ill only after she boarded a return flight to China.That report heightened anxiety among scientists worldwide, who said the finding suggested that containment of the Wuhan coronavirus would be nearly impossible.But now health officials in Germany have raised doubts about the accuracy of that report. The visitor to Germany had “mild unspecific symptoms” while she was still in Germany, said Marieke Degen, a spokeswoman with the Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s public health institute, headquartered in Berlin.The woman’s symptoms, including back pain, had been vague, and she had taken antipyretic medication, according to Bavarian health authorities and scientists at the institute. Antipyretic drugs are used not only to relieve fever, but also as painkillers and for their anti-inflammatory properties.Health officials reported their findings last week to the Early Warning and Response System of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Ms. Degen said; their criticism was first reported by Science magazine.Whatever the inaccuracies in the journal report, many experts remain concerned about the potential for coronavirus to be spread by asymptomatic individuals, in large part because of anecdotal information received from their colleagues in China.“This paper may or may not be flawed — it needs further investigation,” said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. “But I don’t think it negates the concept.”“We had been getting reports from highly reliable people in China — scientists, investigators and public health people who we’ve known over the years — and they’ve been telling us, ‘There’s asymptomatic disease, for sure, and we are seeing asymptomatic transmission,’” Dr. Fauci said.Asymptomatic transmission is unlikely to be driving the epidemic within China, he added, but “it complicates our job.”If the early symptoms include such common complaints as back pain, then infected individuals and their doctors are unlikely to consider the possibility that the patient is infected with a coronavirus, said Marc Lipsitch, professor of epidemiology at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health in Boston.“From a practical perspective, that is almost the same as if she had no symptoms at all,” Dr. Lipsitch said. “Headaches are very common, and the coronavirus is not the principal cause thereof, and they’re not observable by a third party.”If the first symptom is common and vague, he added, “then the public health challenge of figuring out who’s infectious is about as great as if it was truly asymptomatic.”Dr. Maria Van Kerkhove, acting head of emerging diseases at the World Health Organization, said Tuesday that the organization had been aware of reports of individuals who might have transmitted the Wuhan coronavirus before their symptoms appeared or very soon after being infected.But experience with other diseases indicated that many people who were believed to have been asymptomatic actually did experience symptoms.“It is possible that there may be individuals who are asymptomatic that shed virus, but we need more detailed studies around this to determine how often that is happening, and if this is leading to secondary transmission,” Dr. Van Kerkhove said.Whatever the answers to those questions, however, most viral respiratory infections are spread through the coughs and sneezes of symptomatic patients, experts say.The letter at the center of the controversy describes a healthy 33-year-old businessman in Germany who had developed a sore throat, chills and muscle aches on Jan. 24, with a fever spiking to 102.4 degrees Fahrenheit the next day, along with a cough.Before he became ill, he had met in Munich on Jan. 20 and Jan. 21 with a Chinese business partner. A resident of Shanghai, she had been in Germany from Jan. 19 to Jan. 22. The report said that she was healthy during her stay but got sick during her flight back to China. She tested positive for infection with the Wuhan coronavirus on Jan. 26.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]Chinese authorities alerted German health officials, and the businessman was tested and found positive for the infection. On Jan. 28, three additional employees of the German company tested positive for the coronavirus. Two of them had not had any contact with the woman from Shanghai.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.All of the infected were admitted to the hospital, where they were isolated and monitored. None developed severe disease.The authors of the report, researchers in Munich and Berlin, said it was “notable that the infection appears to have been transmitted during the incubation period” of the virus. The woman suffered only a brief, mild illness and recovered.Dr. Michael Hoelscher, one of the authors, told Science magazine that he and his colleagues had not interviewed the Chinese woman who had been ill, and relied on the accounts given by her German colleagues, who said she did not appear to have had any symptoms. Dr. Hoelscher could not be reached for comment.Researchers from the Robert Koch Institute and the Health and Food Safety Authority of Bavaria did interview the woman on the phone, Ms. Degen said, which is how they learned that she might have had symptoms.Julia Morin, a spokeswoman for the New England Journal of Medicine, said, “All we can say right now is that we are looking into the matter.”