What the W.H.O. Does, and How U.S. Funding Cuts Could Affect It
By Daniel Victor and Christine HauserPresident Trump’s decision to halt funding for the World Health Organization, depriving it of its biggest funding source, could have far-reaching effects in efforts to fight diseases and make health care more widely available across the globe.Mr. Trump’s order centered on the organization’s response to the coronavirus pandemic, and he is far from alone in criticizing its actions and statements. Some countries have disregarded the W.H.O.’s efforts as the epidemic has spread, failing to report outbreaks or flouting international regulations.But the W.H.O. is responsible for much more than epidemic response, and it now finds itself financially imperiled by its newfound place in the cross-hairs of American domestic politics.Here are answers to some common questions about the organization.Founded after World War II as part of the United Nations, the Geneva-based organization, which has about 7,000 workers spread over 150 offices worldwide, has no direct authority over member nations. Instead, it is intended to be an international leader in public health by alerting the world to threats, fighting diseases, developing policy and improving access to care.During emergencies like the coronavirus, the W.H.O. is meant to serve as a central coordinating body — guiding containment, declaring emergencies and making recommendations — with countries sharing information to help scientists address outbreaks.But although the W.H.O. is broadly influential, it lacks meaningful enforcement authority and is under budgetary and political pressures, especially from powerful nations like the United States and China and private funders like the Gates Foundation.António Guterres, the secretary general of the United Nations, defended the W.H.O. in a statement on Tuesday, saying it “must be supported, as it is absolutely critical to the world’s efforts to win the war against Covid-19.”He said it is “not the time to reduce the resources for the operations of the World Health Organization or any other humanitarian organization in the fight against the virus.”Financing comes from participating nations and private foundations. The United States is the largest contributor, making up 14.67 percent of its budget.Member dues make up about a quarter of the money the United States gives the W.H.O.; they are calculated relative to a nation’s wealth and population. The rest comes from voluntary contributions, which can vary in size year to year.In 2019, the United States contributed about $553 million. The W.H.O.’s biennial budget — every two years — was about $6.3 billion in 2018-2019.Most of the money from the United States goes toward programs like polio eradication, developing vaccines and increasing access to essential health and nutrition services. Just 2.97 percent of the U.S. contribution goes toward emergency operations, and 2.33 percent is earmarked for outbreak prevention and control.Lawrence O. Gostin, the director of the O’Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law at Georgetown University, said about 70 percent of the funding from the United States has gone to programs that it has earmarked, such as those directed toward AIDS, mental health programs, cancer and heart disease prevention.“The highest profile is on epidemic control and preparedness,” he said. “But it is actually the least important thing W.H.O. has done historically.”The U.S. contribution is nearly twice the next-largest contribution from a nation, the United Kingdom, which funds 7.79 percent of the W.H.O. budget. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation pays for 9.76 percent of the budget.The president has accused the W.H.O. of responding too slowly to the threat of the virus and not being critical enough of China. (The same accusations have been leveled at Mr. Trump, who was warned in January about a possible pandemic and who repeatedly praised the Chinese government for its handling of the virus.)The W.H.O. has consistently advised against travel restrictions, arguing that they are ineffective, can block needed resources and are likely to cause economic harm. But Mr. Trump has frequently pointed to his decision to limit travel from China in late January as evidence he took the threat seriously.But Mr. Trump is not alone in his criticism. Some experts have said the W.H.O. was slow to declare a public health emergency and was too trusting of the Chinese government, which initially tried to conceal the extent of the outbreak, as the country has gained influence in the organization.Mr. Trump’s decision to halt funding appears to be the first such formal announcement of its kind by an American president, experts said, though the United States has had a sometimes contentious history with the W.H.O. on issues like breastfeeding and tobacco.Dr. Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, said there were legitimate concerns about the need for reforms at the W.H.O. Some member states have undue influence over the organization’s messaging, and after the Ebola outbreak that began in 2013, regional offices were seen as having inadequate autonomy to respond to the emergency, he said.“There is room to criticize here,” he said. “But I don’t think, in the middle of a pandemic, making a political statement is the best way to address the shortcomings.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Gostin said that the organization has been hobbled for structural and political reasons, and become timid as a result.“The fact that President Trump is withholding or curtailing funding is exactly the prime example of why we are in this mess,” he said. “The director general is worried that any time he puts a move wrong, they will withdraw funding or undercut the agency politically.”Throughout January, the W.H.O. issued advisories about the dangers of the virus. From Jan. 22 on, Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director general, held almost daily news briefings to warn the world that the virus was spreading, and that the window of opportunity to stop it was closing.But the organization initially hesitated to declare a global health emergency even as the virus spread outside of China.“This is an emergency in China, but it has not yet become a global health emergency,” Dr. Tedros said on Jan. 23. “It may yet become one.” On Jan. 30, the W.H.O. made the official declaration, which often prompts governments to take action. Soon afterward, the State Department warned travelers to avoid China.For weeks, the W.H.O. issued guidance and warnings, and it officially declared the outbreak a pandemic on March 11, calling on governments to work together to battle the virus. Critics said both its declarations came too late, and that earlier decisions could have mobilized governments more quickly. While the W.H.O. is intended to coordinate the worldwide response, there has been little global solidarity, showing the limits of its power. The organization had a plan, but few countries have hewed to it.Mr. Gostin said that in the long run, the president’s decision to cut the funding could lead to a restructuring of the W.H.O., with new international leadership, new health alliances, and greater control over its budget.He said the United States has also been “a thorn in the side” of the W.H.O. over the years, blocking some of its efforts on access to medicines or watering down global action plans on migrants and refugees.But he added: “I think that President Trump in this singular act has taken a step too far.”