Remote and Ready to Fight Coronavirus’s Next Wave
By Wudan YanIn mid-March, Dr. Jim Bristow’s wife came down with gastrointestinal issues. Then, she couldn’t stop coughing.Her symptoms pointed to coronavirus, but she couldn’t get tested — in part because of the nationwide test shortage, but also because the pair lived in Vashon, an idyllic town on an island in Washington State’s Puget Sound with scant medical resources. When Dr. Anthony S. Fauci of President Trump’s coronavirus task force said that the United States was failing with regards to testing, Dr. Bristow, said that it “really struck me.”Dr. Bristow felt inspired to collaborate with other members in the Vashon community to develop a model to test, trace and isolate — in essence, a coronavirus response plan that they call the Rural Test & Trace Toolkit. Dr. Bristow, a retired cardiologist who was trained at the start of the AIDS epidemic, now believes that their model can be replicated, or serve as a guideline, for other isolated parts of the United States, including rural and tribal communities as they continue to face outbreaks.As the novel coronavirus expands beyond major cities and the coasts — and as states start to emerge from shelter-in-place orders — locations with fewer medical resources will need strategies that work for them.“While rural areas are typically underresourced and disadvantaged as it comes to health and health care, a model like this shows that rural places can be particularly nimble and flexible,” said Carrie Henning-Smith, the deputy director of the University of Minnesota’s Rural Health Research Center.Although Vashon Island is geographically part of King County — which includes Seattle, the early epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak in the United States — it is unincorporated, meaning it is governed by the county but mostly manages its own affairs.“We’re an hour and a half from the nearest emergency room, we don’t have acute care facilities on the island, and our ambulance system can be easily overwhelmed,” said Dr. John Osborn, who works as an emergency room physician in Seattle and also leads Vashon’s Medical Reserve Corps. “The challenges we face are faced by many other rural communities.”After Dr. Bristow’s initial frustrations, he eventually got in touch with Dr. Osborn and the reserve corps. They came up with a plan for a coronavirus response team on the island. Another 70 volunteers joined the island’s corps to help — many of them older and at higher risk of dying or contracting severe disease if they are exposed. “We have a volunteer work force we simply can’t expose,” said Dr. Bristow, also the former deputy director of the Joint Genome Institute at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California.Dr. Zach Miller, a resident of Vashon who set up the infectious disease department at the nonprofit regional health care system Group Health (now part of Kaiser), quickly realized that nasal swabs could be used in lieu of the clinically standard nasopharyngeal swabs, skirting the need for more extensive personal protective equipment such as face shields and N95 masks. “This can allow the model to be replicated in other places with a group of well-trained volunteers,” he said.Since April 7, a historic building in the center of Vashon has been transformed into a coronavirus testing site. For a few hours every day, volunteers set up tents and tables outside and don medical masks and gloves to help residents get tested for coronavirus infection. Residents drive up and use their vehicles as personal waiting rooms. But instead of a trained medical practitioner inserting a swab deep into their nose, each patient gets a kit from a volunteer, stops their car and takes the swab themselves.So far, this testing setup has swabbed about 60 individuals, but not turned up any positive residents. (Vashon had four other coronavirus cases that were reported to the Washington Department of Health.) Dr. Bristow’s wife was never tested and has since recovered, and there hasn’t been a positive case on the island in over two weeks.If the testing does turn up positive cases, some volunteers have been trained as contact tracers to identify people who have been in contact with the infected person.“It’s not rocket science and with the right supervision you can train basically anyone to do it,” Dr. Bristow said. Moreover, having someone within the community trace call others might be advantageous because there is more inherent trust.The success of the Vashon method has relied on its medical reserve corps, a regional emergency preparedness team established by the federal government after the Sept. 11 attacks. Until coronavirus made its way to the West Coast, the corps on Vashon was most concerned with preparing for a massive earthquake expected to strike the Pacific Northwest. Dr. Osborn believes that the 829 Medical reserve corps around the country can be a building block for effective testing and tracing in other rural communities.Currently, Dr. Bristow and Dr. Osborn are bringing their model to native nations in the Puget Sound and the Columbia River Basin, where Dr. Osborn had pre-existing relationships from his work on protecting rivers and salmon in the area. Like Vashon, many of these communities are relatively remote.“We really welcomed this idea,” said Fawn Sharp, president of the Quinault Indian Nation in Taholah, Wash.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The reservation is about a 45-minute drive to the nearest emergency room, and has one ambulance for about 3,500 people.“If coronavirus hits here, we are going to be hit hard, so we’re taking every precaution we can,” said M’Liss DeWald, the planning chief for Quinault’s coronavirus incident command team.Ms. DeWald says that she and others in the community have many of the ingredients to implement the Vashon model — with eager volunteers and a physical location to do the testing. But early on they struggled with procuring test kits.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]Being able to implement the model would largely depend on the financial means to purchase test kits and certain protective gear, such as surgical masks and gloves, Dr. Henning-Smith said. Dr. Bristow suggests coronavirus response teams partner with clinics that have access to such gear. In the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe on the Olympic Peninsula in Washington, medical workers have been able to repurpose many of their existing supplies to do testing for the coronavirus, said Dr. Brenda Powell, the tribe’s health services director.Transportation might also be an issue in some rural communities. “How can you do a drive-through if people don’t have cars?” said Dr. Jasmeet Bains, describing one of the biggest challenges for the model. As a family medicine doctor in Taft, Calif., she primarily serves uninsured, undocumented immigrants who walk to her clinic.The Vashon model is very flexible, Dr. Miller said. Home test kits can be delivered to someone’s doorstep and picked up later, he said. The supply-chain bottlenecks that rural communities run into today might change tomorrow.