Food Workers Say C.D.C. Guidelines Put Them at Greater Risk for Infection
By David WaldsteinLisa Harris, a cashier at a Kroger grocery store in Virginia, was surprised last week when a customer offered her a $5 bill as a tip. Ms. Harris, a Kroger employee for 13 years, cited store policy in declining the generous offer.The woman was clearly disappointed that she could not do more.“She looked at me and said, ‘I just want to show you how grateful I am for what you do,’” Ms. Harris said.The coronavirus pandemic has cultivated a growing appreciation for people who work in grocery stores, pharmacies and meat plants. Laborers who were once considered unskilled are now “essential employees,” even heroes to some, because they are providing the nation with food and other crucial supplies at a time when the risk of infection is acute.How employers and public health officials protect these workers has become a critical issue during the outbreak. Some workers’ rights advocates fear that safety standards are eroding at a time when they should be strengthened.Last week, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued new guidelines saying it is OK for essential employees to keep working after potential exposure to Covid-19 if certain conditions are met. Previously, those workers were told to quarantine at home for two weeks. Some say the new recommendations will put already vulnerable workers at even greater risk.“I think the C.D.C. guidelines that they put out the other day are soft,” said Marc Perrone, the president of the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, which represents 1.3 million workers. “I think they are trying to keep the workers inside the plant.”According to the union’s research, nearly 3,000 U.F.C.W. workers had been directly affected by the virus as of Monday — whether through infection, quarantine, hospitalizations and those awaiting test results — and 30 had died. Workers at other companies like Whole Foods, Amazon and Instacart have protested what they consider dangerous conditions and insufficient pay.In March, Walmart announced that two employees of one of its stores in Illinois had died from the coronavirus. The family of one of them, Wando Evans, has filed a wrongful-death lawsuit, claiming the store was negligent by not providing employees with adequate protection.A representative for the C.D.C. did not respond to a request for comment.The new C.D.C. guidelines state that essential workers who may have been exposed to the virus may continue to work provided they are asymptomatic, wear a mask at all times for 14 days after their last exposure and have their temperature taken before entering the workplace.Workers who may have been exposed to the virus must follow C.D.C. guidance on social distancing, remaining at least six feet from co-workers and potential customers. If they show symptoms, they should be sent home immediately and all surfaces at the workplace should be cleaned and disinfected, according to the guidelines. In addition, anyone who came within six feet of an employee with potential exposure should be notified and considered to have also been exposed.Labor advocates like Marcy Goldstein-Gelb, the co-executive director of the National Council for Occupational Safety and Health, say the new guidelines may encourage employers to pressure workers to return to their jobs too soon, often without adequate protection or pay.“It’s a complete reversal of the policy that the C.D.C. has for the public,” Ms. Goldstein-Gelb said. “It disregards the fact that, right now, workers are dying every day needlessly in unconscionable numbers.”Grocery stores are among the remaining high-risk transmission points for the disease now that many other commercial businesses have been closed. The employees are in regular contact with customers at checkout, behind counters and as they stock shelves along the aisles. Larger stores can accommodate from 800 to 1,200 people a day, and served as many as 10,000 a day just before the nation shut down in March, when panicky customers feared shortages.Mr. Perrone said he visited eight stores in Northern Virginia last week and was “appalled” by the hazards he saw, including many workers and customers without masks and people in close contact with one another. He said, at the very least, anyone entering a store should wear a mask. The C.D.C. recommended in early April that everyone wear cloth face coverings in stores, but the policy is voluntary.Workers are also imploring customers to take more care while in stores. They say many have been throwing used gloves and wipes in carts and on floors for employees to pick up. Many customers are still browsing with their hands and not their eyes and blaming workers for lack of goods on shelves.“The fear that we feel is absolutely real,” said Gregg Finch, 44, a Stop & Shop produce clerk in New York, who added that customers must help in the effort to “keep everyone in all of our stores safe.”New Jersey recently mandated that all customers must wear masks to enter a store and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York ordered employers to provide masks for all of their workers.Ms. Harris, the Kroger cashier and a U.F.C.W. member, said her store is trying to maintain safety by making modifications. Like many stores across the country, it put up plastic barriers to separate customers from cashiers and placed markings on floors to urge six-foot distancing. Her Kroger is also closing two hours early every day to conduct comprehensive cleaning.She said she interacts with roughly 300 customers per day, but neither she nor any of her co-workers have been provided with masks yet. A local charity has promised to give them homemade versions soon. No one at Ms. Harris’s store has become ill, she said, but two employees at nearby stores tested positive. She added that her boyfriend delivers food from local restaurants, and they both feel a sense of inevitability.“Chances are high that I will get this thing,” Ms. Harris, 32, said in a telephone interview from her home. “It’s getting closer, and it’s terrifying.”In an email, a spokesperson for Kroger said that the company had taken steps to promote safety, including a limit on the number of shoppers allowed in stores at one time, the installation of plexiglass partitions at checkout lanes and enhanced daily sanitation practices, among other measures.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“We continue to take additional actions across our family of companies to protect our associates and customers,” the statement said.The U.F.C.W., in addition to about 900,000 grocery store workers, represents roughly 250,000 meat plant workers, including those at a JBS plant in Greeley, Colo., where last week 30 workers tested positive for the virus. In Sioux Falls, S.D., a Smithfield pork processing plant that supplies tens of millions of servings of food per week closed indefinitely on Sunday after dozens of workers were found to have Covid-19, the disease caused by the virus.Mr. Perrone is especially worried about the meat packing plants under the new C.D.C. guidelines. Many are in rural areas, some with 2,000 to 4,000 employees working side-by-side in chilly conditions. Because of the remote locations, a major outbreak at one of the plants could overwhelm the nearest hospitals.Just 62 miles to the east of the Sioux Falls plant, Smithfield operates another plant in Worthington, Minn., a state with several meat packing plants. Dr. Kris Ehresmann, the director of infectious disease epidemiology and prevention for the Minnesota Department of Health, said she and her staff are closely monitoring all of the state’s meat processing plants.She said that when the new C.D.C. guidelines were issued last week, her office issued stricter recommendations about when workers should return following exposure to the virus — in particular, only after a 14-day isolation. To return before that, she said, the worker must be considered so essential to a critically important job that his or her absence would create a “crisis situation.”In those cases, she said, employers should contact the health department to determine the safest possible path.“We look to C.D.C. as a lead and we have decided in Minnesota that we want to take a bit more of a conservative approach to this,” Dr. Ehresmann said, “and we have amended those guidelines in the ways that we think are better for our state.”Ms. Goldstein-Gelb said it was time to re-examine the term “essential employee,” as well as to improve safety and pay for workers who meet the definition. Ms. Harris said her Kroger gave all employees a $300 bonus and added $2 per hour in “hero pay,” which she said was insufficient.