The Fear of Coronavirus and Flu Colliding in the Fall
By Denise GradyCould the United States face two epidemics at the same time next fall, flu and the coronavirus?That frightening idea was raised by Dr. Robert Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, during an interview on Tuesday with The Washington Post. He suggested that a new surge in coronavirus cases could coincide with the next flu season, causing an even more difficult crisis than the one the nation is facing now.“We’re going to have the flu epidemic and the coronavirus epidemic at the same time,” he said.At Wednesday’s White House briefing, President Trump said that Dr. Redfield had been misquoted and would clarify his remarks. But Dr. Redfield then said that The Post had quoted him correctly. But he tried to dial back the alarm his comments had provoked.“I think it’s really important to emphasize what I didn’t say,” Dr. Redfield said at the briefing. “I didn’t say this was going to be worse, I said it was going to be more difficult and potentially complicated.”He reiterated several times that if the situation became more difficult, that did not mean it became worse.He added: “The key to my comments and the reason I really wanted to stress them was to appeal to the American public to embrace the flu vaccine with confidence. One of the greatest tools we have as we go through the fall-winter season is to get the American public to embrace the influenza vaccine and thereby minimize the impact of flu to be the other respiratory disease we confront.”Mr. Trump said, “We may not even have corona coming back.” He continued: “If it comes back, it won’t be coming back in the form that it was, it will be coming back in smaller doses that we can contain. What the doctor was saying, and I spoke to him at great length, he was saying if it should come back, you have the flu and the embers of corona, but in my opinion from everything I’ve seen, it can never be like anything like we witnessed right now. It’s nothing like — what we’ve just gone through, we will not go through.”Epidemiologists and infectious disease experts interviewed before the Wednesday briefing doubted that the virus would go away, and did not rule out the prospect of a worse crisis in the fall if the two diseases strike at the same time.“When flu season comes, there is the possibility that we will be dealing with two respiratory viruses at the same time — flu and Covid,” Dr. Thomas Frieden, the former head of the C.D.C. and the president of Resolve to Save Lives, a nonprofit focused on disease prevention, said in an email. “This could be a double challenge for our health care systems.”Even if social distancing and other mitigation measures succeed in “flattening the curve,” once those strictures are loosened, cases could surge again, Dr. Frieden said.New flares in Japan and Singapore, where the disease had appeared to be under control, have made it clear that the virus may retreat but does not disappear.“The end game with this virus is, it’s going to try to infect as many of us as possible,” Dr. Michael Osterholm, the director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, said in an interview. “With the transmission characteristics we’ve seen, this is a virus that’s going to require at least 60 to 70 percent of population to be immune, from being infected or by vaccination, for substantial reduction of transmission.”He added, “We have a long ways to go yet.”Dr. Frieden’s analysis was similar: “Covid-19 is likely to continue to circulate until there is a vaccine. That means we need to be ready to reimpose distancing if cases threaten to overwhelm health and public health systems.”Most experts agree that a vaccine is at least a year or more away, at best.The C.D.C. did not respond to requests for more information in time for publication.Dr. Osterholm said there was a widely held misconception that if new cases start to diminish, people can go back to work, the downswing will continue, the disease will go away and life will go back to normal.“We don’t know what it’s going to do,” he said. “Like gravity, it’s going to keep trying to pull us down.”There is no evidence that the warming temperatures of spring and summer will get rid of the disease, a scientific panel told the White House this month, noting that the virus was spreading rapidly in countries with hot weather, including Australia and Iran. Some laboratory studies have found that high temperature and humidity could lower the ability of the virus to survive, but the studies were not conclusive, according to the report, which came from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, independent agencies that advise the government and the public.“Generally, there are respiratory viruses, including flu and some common cold coronaviruses, that are seasonal,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said in an interview on Tuesday, before Dr. Redfield’s comments were published. “They do much better in winter and seem to taper off in summer. We do not know at all whether that will be a factor with this virus. There are indications it may not be the case.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.He added: “With warm weather, like in Singapore, they’re having outbreaks when it is warm. It is conceivable that on the basis of mitigation alone as we happen coincidentally to get into May, June, July, and it goes down, people may think it’s weather, but it’s the mitigation.”Dr. Fauci described the ability of the virus to spread as “exquisite.” Both in the interview and in the briefing on Wednesday, he said that the nation would still be dealing with the coronavirus in the fall. He said he expected a resurgence then.“It could be mini or it could be a big blast,” he said in the interview. “We better be prepared with a real clear adequate amount of tests and all the hospital things you need if you get an outbreak.”Dr. Frieden said it was possible that the steps taken to stop transmission of the coronavirus would also limit spread of the flu, but he said it was way too early to predict what the next flu season would be like or to say for sure whether there would be overlapping epidemics.“The only thing predictable about flu, as Dr. Anne Schuchat of C.D.C. taught me, is that it’s unpredictable,” Dr. Frieden said.