Medical Students, Sidelined for Now, Find New Ways to Fight Coronavirus
By Penina Krieger and Abby GoodnoughAs hospitals around the United States brace for an ongoing surge in coronavirus cases, one question they are grappling with is whether medical students should be deployed to help care for patients infected with the virus.For now, the nation’s 90,000 medical students have been largely sidelined from patient care during the crisis. Last week, the Association of American Medical Colleges recommended that medical students end all patient contact for at least two weeks. The reasoning is that sending medical students home helps conserve scarce personal protective equipment — including masks, gloves and gowns. It also gives schools time to educate students on Covid-19 should the students eventually be needed for patient care.Disappointed by the abrupt halt to their training, medical students around the country have responded with grass roots efforts to secure masks, staff patient call centers and even provide child care for beleaguered doctors.Students at the N.Y.U. Grossman School of Medicine began using a Slack channel to mobilize volunteers. One of the largest efforts involves creatively sourcing personal protective equipment from a range of businesses, including veterinarians, tattoo parlors, dry cleaners, hardware stores and hair and nail salons. So far, students from N.Y.U. have collected about 8,200 surgical masks and 700 of the more protective N95 respirator masks.“I thought I’d be learning to listen to the heart and lungs or conduct an outpatient interview, but that’s not what is needed right now,” said Elyse Berlinberg, a second-year medical student at N.Y.U. “Part of the role of being a physician is being part of the community and knowing their needs and responding to them. I think the service we are doing now is part of forming our professional identity.”transcriptHealth care workers around the world are asking for help. “What do you want?” “PPE.” “When do you need it?” “Now.” They’re in desperate need of more PPE, also known as personal protective equipment. Stocks of the critical gear are disappearing during the coronavirus pandemic. Doctors say they are rationing gloves, reusing masks and raiding hardware stores. The C.D.C. has even said that scarves or bandannas can be used as protection as a last resort. “I’ve met the doctors, and talked with them every day. I think there’s an interesting challenge here in that, currently, there’s such a need that if they had anything, they would deploy it.” The cries for help are mobilizing a wide range of innovators, some of them even joining forces through online messaging platforms like Slack. These are engineers, doctors and even high school students from around the world. They come from all walks of life, but say their goal is the same. “It’s amazing because no one’s asking which country are you from? They’re just like, how can I help? What do you need?” They’re pitching in by crowdsourcing designs for masks, face shields and even ventilators that could be reproduced around the world. This is Nick Moser. He’s an active player in one of the maker groups. His day job is at a design studio. Now, he’s designing replicable face masks. “We’re focused on three products: a face shield, a cloth mask and an alternative to N95-rated respirators. The face shield is the first line of defense for medical workers. It protects against droplets. If a patient coughs, it’ll hit the face shield rather than them.” Some designs are produced using 3-D printers or laser cutters. “There you go.” Then, the prototypes are field-tested by health care workers. Even some university labs are experimenting with DIY techniques. A group at Georgia Tech is working with open-source designs from the internet to develop products. “My lab works in the area of frugal science, and we build low-cost tools for resource-limited areas. And now, we’ve realized that I don’t have to go that far. It’s in our backyard, right? We need it now. So this is a plastic sheet I have — not too different from what you would get out from a 2-liter Coke or a soda bottle. I actually bought this from an art store. It’s just sheets of PET, so we can cut these out. We are calling this an origami face shield, and it’s the Level 1 protection. This is one idea. There are multiple different prototypes.” “This headband can be reused, and a doctor or nurse could just basically tear this off and basically snap another one on. We’re hearing that, in some cases, that they go through close to 2,000 of these a day.” Because the need is growing so rapidly, the makers are also thinking about how to increase their production. “So how do we get from this one that someone made at home on a laser cutter or a 3-D printer, and then get it in the hands of thousands of doctors and front-line workers?” They’re working with mass manufacturers that can take their tested designs, and replicate them at a larger scale. “We’ve been on the phone talking to a number of suppliers, material suppliers. So I think one of the neat things that we’ve done is not only the design, proving that you can make it rapidly, but then also trying to secure the entire supply chains.” This is Dr. Susan Gunn, whose hospital system in New Orleans has even started its own initiative to 3-D print equipment. “So it starts with an idea. We put the idea into place. And then we make sure that it’s professional-grade first. Infection control is looking at it, and we’re making sure that we’re using the correct materials that would be approved by the C.D.C. and the World Health Organization.” Dr. Gunn says the gear is a safe alternative for those who might otherwise face a shortage. “We’re creating face shields and we’re creating these different PPEs, and we’re putting them in the hands where people felt like they needed them.” Another critical piece of equipment is the N95 mask, and the supply is dwindling fast. Nick and his team are designing a robust alternative for this mask that can hold any filter material, and be mass produced. “It is easily printable. This one is used in medical situations where there’s an actively infectious patient. So nursing homes or obviously I.C.U. units would be the target to receive these.” “These are really hard objects to manufacture because you’re going to give it to a nurse, and then I want to be really confident that it will not let a virus through, right?” This equipment is not approved by federal agencies, but the designers are testing their respirator prototypes for safety. “That was basically the first, almost the first question that was asked. Can we do anything that’s actually going to be safe and helpful?” Some makers are pursuing even more ambitious projects. An engineer named Stephen Robinson in New Haven, Conn., is working on designing ventilators to help patients breathe. Countries are facing a dire shortage of the lifesaving machines. Right now, these DIY ventilators are still prototypes. “So really, this should be thought of as the seed of an idea that could potentially be grown with, and absolutely requiring, the medical and the tech communities.” But they could become key if critical supplies run out. “We’re in very uncertain times, and I see explorations and projects as kind of an insurance policy that could potentially be leaned on if there was extreme circumstances.” Health care workers are hopeful that these efforts could prevent an even worse outcome. “We don’t want anybody — let’s be clear — to use a bandanna to protect themselves. I hope it never gets to the point where we have to wear a bandanna. And I don’t think, with this initiative that we will get there.” For innovators like Saad, the challenge is personal. “I just can’t stop. I have to do stuff. And then I’m currently at a hospital. That’s why I have this uplifting little flower portrait. We’re expecting a baby boy, and what do we tell him when he grows up about what we did when society needed us?”Another “mask drive,” held by medical students at the University of California, San Francisco, over the weekend, collected almost 15,000 masks for local hospitals.At the University of Colorado School of Medicine, student organizers used a GroupMe texting app, Facebook and email to mobilize not only classmates but also area nursing, physical therapy and pharmacy students. Now more than 300 student volunteers are working at nine locations in the area, including hospitals, elder outreach programs and the local Salvation Army.Some students have been deployed to Covid-19 call centers, fielding questions about people’s symptoms and when to get tested or go to the hospital. Others students stand outside hospital doors, screening visitors.“I was supposed to start a palliative care rotation on Monday, and I can’t, and I won’t get those skills,” said Jake Fox, a fourth-year medical student who helped coordinate the effort, and who will start his residency at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston in June. “That said, what we are doing is very purposeful. Doing something meaningful now supersedes that disappointment.”Students at the University of Minnesota School of Medicine organized Minnesota CovidSitters, a student-run group that created a website to match medical students with health care workers who need child care, pet sitting or errands during the crisis.Laura Bowman, a second-year medical student there, volunteered and was matched with a medical resident who needed child care for two young children. Ms. Bowman spent a rainy day last week baking chocolate chip cookies, doing a dinosaur puzzle, and coloring a Paw Patrol Rescue Pups coloring book with two young children of a medical resident. “It isn’t exactly what I pictured myself doing, but it’s in line with my idea of health care providers,” Ms. Bowman said. “It’s been a great opportunity to help in a different but meaningful way.”Opinions are divided and changing as the outbreak progresses. Some argue that students’ lack of experience limits their value in treating patients and puts the students needlessly at risk. Others say they will be needed, can be trained to help safely and will learn valuable lessons from being involved.Dr. John Prescott, chief academic officer for the Association of American Medical Colleges, said the group will continue to update its guidelines for medical students, but the decision on whether to deploy medical students to the front lines is up to each school, depending on the local situation.“What was normal a week ago, even two days ago, is not where we are now,” said Dr. Prescott. “The situation continues to evolve and change.”Boston Medical Center has decided to keep medical students away from patients with suspected or confirmed coronavirus infection, Dr. Ravin Davidoff, the center’s chief medical officer, said.“Our primary emphasis is to protect them from unnecessary exposure,” he said, but added that the shortage of personal protective equipment was also a major reason for limiting the students’ roles.Vanderbilt University Medical Center has also decided that medical students should not treat coronavirus patients. But Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert there, said it could be valuable training.Updated May 20, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“They’re going to have to deal with this as medical professionals, as practicing physicians, whatever their specialty turns out to be,” he said.At the same time, Dr. Schaffner said, concerns about the supply chain for personal protective gear were also leading Vanderbilt to limit the number of people entering isolation rooms to the minimum number truly needed to take care of the patient.Dr. Shanta Zimmer, senior associate dean for education at the University of Colorado School of Medicine, said the school decided that 184 third-year medical students would not return to their clinical rotations starting last Monday, for at least four weeks.“The most important reason is actually to help preserve PPE,” she said, referring to masks and other protective equipment, “and to let the important front-line providers have access to that.”Other factors, Dr. Zimmer said, included the fact that elective procedures have been scaled way back at the hospitals where University of Colorado students do their rotations, and that the students are needed at call centers and to check in with primary care patients. All students are also taking an online elective that the medical school just created about Covid-19.“Not everyone is destined to be a front-line provider in situations like this,” Dr. Zimmer said. “But it doesn’t mean they can’t be super helpful right now.”As for whether the medical school would agree to deploy its students to the front lines in the event of a surge of patients, Dr. Zimmer said, “We are having this debate back and forth on my team right now. The fourth-year students, they’re almost doctors — graduation is in May. For the third-years, we are trying to prioritize their safety and keep them busy with virtual training.”Cyrus Ghaznavi, a second-year medical student at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, said a child-care service organized by students to support hospital workers received more than 100 requests in the first 24 hours.“Anything we can do to relieve burden on the real heroes,” he said. “We can enable them to work at peak performance and that is more helpful than having us there when everyone is overworked.”