Coronavirus Is Spreading, but W.H.O. Says It’s Not a Global Emergency
By Denise GradyThe World Health Organization on Thursday decided not to declare the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak a global emergency, despite the spread of the dangerous respiratory infection from China to at least five other countries.Although the disease has reached beyond China, the number of cases in other countries is still relatively small, and the disease does not seem to be spreading within those countries, agency officials said. Of more than 800 cases now reported, the wide majority — and all the 25 deaths — have been in China, according to Chinese officials.“At this time, there is no evidence of human-to-human transmission outside China,” Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director general, said at a news conference in Geneva. “That doesn’t mean it won’t happen.”“Make no mistake,” he added. “This is an emergency in China, but it has not yet become a global health emergency. It may yet become one.”The committee weighing the decision was divided, its chairman, Dr. Didier Houssin, said during the briefing. Some members felt the course of the outbreak warranted an emergency declaration now, but others said it that was too soon to decide, citing the limited number of cases in countries outside China as well as the country’s efforts to contain the virus.Emergency declarations can appear to single out one country as a threat to the rest of the world. Dr. Houssin said the committee also considered the potential impact of its decision on people in China.Dr. Tedros said he would not hesitate to ask the W.H.O. to reconsider declaring an emergency, even within a matter of days, if more evidence emerges to prove that the outbreak poses a global threat.There will probably be more cases of the disease in other parts of China and other countries, and all countries should have measures in place to detect cases, including at health facilities, W.H.O. officials said.Although several countries, including the United States, have begun screening air travelers arriving from Wuhan, Dr. Tedros said that the W.H.O. prefers exit screening for people leaving affected regions.“There is still a lot we don’t know,” Dr. Tedros said. “We don’t know the source, we don’t know how easily it spreads, we don’t understand its clinical features or severity.”The new infection is caused by a coronavirus, from the same family that caused epidemics of SARS and MERS, which have killed hundreds of people in dozens of countries.The first cases of the Wuhan illness occurred in people who had been to a market that sold fish and a variety of live animals for consumption, and researchers think the virus came from one of those animals. But which animal is not known. The market was shut down, and it is not clear whether any of the animals or products there were kept for testing.Finding the source is important, so sales of that animal and its meat can be halted. China has many such markets, and they were also the origin of SARS.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]So far, Dr. Tedros said, about a quarter of the people infected had become severely ill, but most others had milder symptoms. Most who died had underlying health problems, and many were older than 60.About 830 people have been infected with the virus in China, and at least 25 have died, according to Chinese authorities.Human-to-human transmission has occurred in China, but so far appears limited to people in close contact with patients: family members and health workers caring for the ill.Carried by travelers, the virus has reached Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Singapore, Taiwan, Vietnam and the United States. Investigators in other countries, including Mexico, are evaluating suspected cases.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Officials in China have closed transportation links from and within Wuhan, and are imposing travel restrictions on other affected cities. These steps have significantly escalated the country’s efforts to contain the spread of the virus just days before the Lunar New Year holiday, when hundreds of millions travel in and out of the country.Dr. Tedros said that he hoped that the measures China took would be effective and short-lived.Only five global public health emergency declarations have been made in the past:In 2009, for pandemic influenza;In 2014, for a polio resurgence in several countries;Again in 2014, for the Ebola epidemic in West Africa;In 2016, for the Zika virus epidemic;And in 2019, for an Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo.The decisions are fraught. Health authorities do not want to cry wolf by raising alarms about an illness that turns out not to be severe — or to ignore a real threat. If they act relatively early in an outbreak, as in this case, they may lack key information about the severity and contagiousness of the disease.There are political and economic considerations as well. Declaring an emergency signals to governments that the situation is serious and that international help and cooperation are needed to contain the outbreak.Control measures may save not only lives, but money. The SARS epidemic, caused by a related coronavirus in 2002 and 2003, cost the global economy $30 billion to $100 billion, according to an article published Thursday in the medical journal JAMA.But declaring an emergency may stigmatize the country struggling with an outbreak, and spur costly bans on travel and trade by other countries, even if health authorities discourage those actions.