Early Graduation Could Send Medical Students to Virus Front Lines
By Emma GoldbergThe battle to treat an ever-growing number of patients infected with the new coronavirus just gained its newest recruits: soon-to-be medical graduates. Several medical schools in Massachusetts and New York announced this week that they intended to offer early graduation to their fourth-year students, fast-tracking them into front-line hospital care as the need for medical workers surges.On Tuesday, the Grossman School of Medicine at New York University became the first in the United States to announce an offer of early graduation, in an email to students. That followed similar moves earlier this year in Italy and Britain, which advanced many final-year medical students into intermediate clinical service.On Thursday, the medical schools at Tufts University, Boston University and the University of Massachusetts announced that they planned to move up their graduation dates to April from May, after a request from the state of Massachusetts to help expand the medical work force. Harvard Medical School said it was “actively considering” the same step.In Massachusetts, the state would provide 90-day provisional licenses for early graduates, allowing almost automatic entry into clinical work. The move would make some 700 medical students in Massachusetts eligible to offer patient care at least eight weeks earlier than expected.On Friday, Columbia’s Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons became the latest to announce that final year students would graduate early, on April 15, rather than May 20. Graduates would have the option to temporarily join the staff at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital.Dr. Steven Abramson, vice dean for education, faculty and academic affairs at N.Y.U. Grossman, said the school’s decision came as its hospitals were overwhelmed with an increasing number of Covid-19 patient cases, including in critical care. He said several fourth-year students had approached school administrators to volunteer their service.“We’re running into issues of manpower,” Dr. Abramson said. “That led us to conclude: Why not graduate students who are interested in serving in hospitals now? They’ve completed their requirements and they’re prepared.”Most American medical schools last four years, at which point the medical degree is granted, followed by residencies and internships to develop the specialties of new doctors.At N.Y.U., Dr. Abramson said, fourth-year students would be able to graduate in early April and begin patient care at N.Y.U.’s hospitals, on medicine floors and in the emergency room. They would then depart in late June or July for the start of their scheduled residency programs, with a two-week quarantine in between. Of 120 fourth-year students surveyed this week, he said 69 responded that they would be interested in early clinical service.While the Liaison Committee on Medical Education, which accredits medical degree programs in the United States, has offered guidelines for early graduation, N.Y.U.’s decision awaits final approval from the New York State Department of Education.A number of New York medical schools are still developing proposals for early graduations. Dr. David Muller, dean for medical education at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, said the school hoped to have a proposal ready to share with students by early next week. The early graduation would most likely occur in mid-April, he added, and would be voluntary, although details need to be worked out. The Albert Einstein College of Medicine also is working toward early graduation.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]Medical students around the country have spent recent weeks mobilizing to support local physicians. They have staffed coronavirus hotlines, coordinated meal deliveries and even offered their time as babysitters to other medical workers. Many said they were excited to contribute their medical training.“We see everything the physicians around us are going through and we’re excited we can bring some relief to the physicians who trained and mentored us,” said Greg Peters, a fourth-year student at Harvard who plans to start a residency in emergency care in Boston.He added, though, that the prospect of early graduation and fast-tracked service came as a surprise. “My classmates and I are Type A people who plan everything out, and our plans are out the window,” he said. “We’re confident in our training, but we’re a little worried about getting thrown in there.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The Association of American Medical Colleges, a research and advocacy group for medical schools and major teaching hospitals, said it supported the early graduations following L.C.M.E. guidelines, but emphasized the importance of supervision for new graduates.“As we think about what the role of these new graduates would be, it would need to be under supervision,” said Dr. Alison Whelan, the association’s chief medical education officer.Dr. Abramson said he expected more medical schools around the country to move toward early graduations.