Just What Older People Didn’t Need: More Isolation
The coronavirus pandemic could sharpen the health risks of loneliness. But there are ways to connect.By Paula SpanAt midmorning, Lisa Carfagna, a marketing staffer for the 92nd Street Y in Manhattan, took a brief break from working at home on Long Island and called the Rubins on the Upper East Side.They were doing fine, Seymour Rubin, 89, assured her over a speakerphone.“We try to have a project every day,” said Shirley Rubin, 84. “Today, I’m making a beef stew for the first time in 40 years.”“If I’m here tomorrow,” her husband put in, “you’ll know it was good.”When the coronavirus outbreak forced the Y to shutter last month — leaving participants in its senior program bereft of their usual lectures, classes and exercise programs — about 70 staff members quickly volunteered to make weekly calls to all 650 of them. Ms. Carfagna regularly checks in with 25.Like many cultural organizations, the Y has turned to digital technology — streamed concerts and lectures, classes on Zoom, discussion groups via conference call — to keep its older patrons engaged.But computers and smartphones can feel daunting; about a third of Americans over 65 told Pew Research they weren’t confident about using digital technology. About half said they needed help in setting up new devices. Some seniors lack broadband connection.Besides, “there’s something about that live, person-to-person connection,” said Julia Zeuner, who directs the senior program and mobilized the volunteers. “A friendly voice on the other end of the line.”Social isolation and loneliness among older adults have become such a concern that two years ago, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine assembled an expert committee to analyze research findings and make recommendations.Its report arrived in late February — as the coronavirus spread.Now, older people have been sternly warned to adopt the very practices that, the committee found, can endanger their health. With senior centers, day programs, theaters, parks, gyms and restaurants closed and most in-person visiting prohibited, they are enduring a lengthening period of social separation. Nursing homes and assisted living facilities are barring family members.“It’s a public health crisis that should be recognized,” said Colleen Galambos, a committee member and a gerontologist at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. “People who normally wouldn’t be considered isolated or lonely are now experiencing it.”These are not the same state, the National Academies report pointed out. Social isolation refers to an objective lack of social contact with others; loneliness, a subjective sense of being left out and ignored, can strike even when people are surrounded by others.By itself, aging doesn’t create either problem. But it raises the risks. “Many older people, especially women over 75, are living by themselves because their spouses died,” said Dr. Dan Blazer, the committee chair and a psychiatrist at the Duke University School of Medicine.Retirement, difficulty driving, hearing and vision loss, cognitive or physical problems that make getting out difficult — all contribute to a troubling tide of disconnection.About a quarter of people over 65 living independently in their communities are considered socially isolated, and 43 percent of those over 60 report feeling lonely — and that was before public health officials instructed older people, and everyone else, to stay home.“It’s not just touchy-feely stuff,” said Dr. Ken Covinsky, a geriatrician at the University of California, San Francisco, who has been a co-author on studies on loneliness. “Isolation is a real risk.”In fact, it’s associated with significantly higher rates of heart disease and stroke and a 50 percent increased risk of dementia, the National Academies report pointed out. Isolated or lonely seniors report a greater incidence of depression and anxiety.They suffer a mortality rate comparable to that linked to smoking, obesity, excessive alcohol consumption and physical inactivity.When the committee looked for promising solutions, it found studies showing that attending exercise programs helped reduce isolation — not a useful approach at the moment. The evidence for much-heralded technological approaches, from robotic pets and Zoom to voice-activated assistants, remains thin thus far.How, then, to help older people maintain their social connections when they’re supposed to be socially, or at least physically, distanced? Individuals and organizations around the country are proposing and trying a variety of tactics.Dr. Covinsky, particularly concerned about restrictions on visitors to older people at home or in senior facilities, has suggested that as coronavirus testing becomes more broadly available, family members or friends who repeatedly test negative could become “designated visitors,” permitted to spend time with their quarantined loved ones.“We have restricted something that’s pretty essential,” he said. “We need to move away from thinking of visitors to old people as optional.”In Southern California, two PACE programs — federally funded efforts to provide full medical and social services for those aging in place — have leased tablets called GrandPads for their roughly 250 participants. Designed for those over 75, the devices allow seniors to call the PACE center, receive and reply to email, and receive video calls from PACE staff members (and play games).At the Queens Public Library in New York, program assistants are calling about 50 homebound patrons each week to remind them of programs available by phone and to check on their well-being, said Madlyn Schneider, the older adult coordinator.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.In Los Angeles, the Motion Picture and Television Fund has fielded a groundswell of new volunteers for its Daily Call Sheet program, which matches them with older people who share their entertainment industry backgrounds.The volunteers, once vetted and trained, call once or twice a week. “It’s reminiscing and connecting and fundamental human conversation,” said Dr. Scott Kaiser, the geriatrician who established the program.The Friendship Line in San Francisco similarly operates a “warmline,” though without the industry link. It has also seen a surge in users, and so many new volunteers that it has resorted to a waiting list.Dr. Blazer reports that the drivers delivering Meals on Wheels to his 96-year-old mother-in-law in suburban Atlanta, instead of just dropping off food as usual, now tap on her door and chat from across the hallway of her independent living building. “They have a conversation from six feet away,” he said. “She says it makes a huge difference.”However heartened by such efforts, Dr. Blazer cautioned that “social isolation isn’t going away.” He worries about what will happen when some degree of normalcy dawns — and millions of isolated or lonely elders recede from public attention.“We’ll find ways to adapt to this, but my hope for older people is that we don’t forget them,” he said. “If this epidemic has taught us anything, it’s that we have to reach out.”Individuals can do that, too. My friend Peg Rosen, a freelance writer in suburban New Jersey, has begun FaceTiming with her mother-in-law in Manhattan every morning.They work the New York Times crossword puzzle together, just as they used to on Sundays in a city coffee shop, a pleasure now forbidden them. (To subvert generational stereotypes, it’s Ms. Rosen, 56, who prefers doing the puzzle on paper; the 87-year-old is using her tablet.)“It’s delightful, a highlight of my day,” Ms. Rosen reported. “I think we’ll continue when this all ends.”