Now That Coronavirus Tests Are Free, Some Insurers Are Waiving Costs for Treatment
By Reed AbelsonThis article was updated to reflect changes in government and insurers’ policies.Policies regarding your out-of-pocket costs for coronavirus testing and treatment are changing rapidly.State insurance regulators are taking steps to limit how much you might eventually owe, and insurance companies and employers have also changed the rules for most plans to eliminate deductibles or co-payments for testing.Now insurers are starting to waive out-of-pocket costs if you need to go to the hospital, and that could reduce your bills. But it’s still unclear how much you’ll wind up paying, leaving public health experts worried that people who are sick may hesitate to get medical care because of concerns over bills.“The problem is we have reams and reams of evidence that if people know they face hundreds or thousands of dollars in bills, they’ll hesitate, they’ll wait and see,” said Sabrina Corlette, a research professor at Georgetown University.transcriptI would just say enjoy your home. Stay. I would just say, right now. We have to get this problem fixed. Welcome to Miami!But insurers and employers are taking steps to limit what you might owe. “Almost every relevant person or entity has said something about holding consumers harmless,” said Katherine Hempstead, a senior policy adviser at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.With the caveat that things are shifting, here’s what you should know.Under the legislation just passed by Congress, testing for the coronavirus is free, as are the cost of a doctor’s visit or trip to the emergency room to get the test.Worried that residents might hesitate because of the potential bills, many states, including California, New York and Washington, had already required the insurance companies they regulate to cover the cost of a test, according to a recent analysis from Georgetown University.Private insurance companies had also generally volunteered to waive any costs their members might face for the actual test. Employers who offer plans and are self-insured followed suit.Government programs like Medicare and Medicaid are also covering the test, which isn’t that expensive; Medicare is paying anywhere from $36 to $51 for the actual test.People without insurance, or those enrolled in so-called junk plans that don’t meet the standards for insurance under the Affordable Care Act, should also be able to get tested at no cost, said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation, which recently released an issue brief on private insurance coverage of the coronavirus.It’s possible, especially if you go somewhere outside your health plan’s network or undergo unrelated tests. “There are still questions about the battery of testing people may receive and out-of-network testing,” said Cheryl Fish-Parcham, the director of access initiatives at Families USA, a consumer advocacy group.You could also face sizable out-of-pocket costs if you have something that looks like the coronavirus, like the garden-variety flu, but isn’t. While New Mexico is requiring insurers to cover testing for flu and pneumonia, so far it’s an exception.On Sunday, President Trump praised two of the nation’s largest health insurers, Cigna and Humana, for agreeing to waive out-of-pocket costs for treatment in some of their plans.Two other major insurers, CVS Health’s Aetna and UnitedHealth Group, have also said they would cover their customers’ treatment costs.Other insurers are following suit: Florida Blue, the state’s big Blue Cross plan, is waiving cost sharing for some of its plans, including its Obamacare policies. Harvard Pilgrim, which insures people in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Connecticut and Maine, is also eliminating out-of-pocket costs for Covid-19 treatment.The Blue Cross and Blue Shield Federal Employee Program, which covers nearly six million federal employees, retirees and their families, previously said it would waive co-payments and deductibles for medically necessary treatment.Different Blue Cross plans have different policies, and the situation is fluid, according to the B.But a lot of fine print remains: Some of the insurers have waived cost sharing for the next two months, while others are eliminating out-of-pocket expenses only for hospital stays. Many require people to go to hospitals and doctors within their plans.Another big caveat: The companies’ decisions also do not apply to the health plans they administer for employers that self-insure. Each of those companies will have to decide whether they will follow the insurers’ lead. A majority of workers with job-based coverage, 61 percent, are in self-funded plans, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. That amounts to roughly 100 million people.The federal government has also made it easier for people who have certain high-deductible plans. The Internal Revenue Service recently allowed people in those plans to have coronavirus testing and treatment covered by the plan before they meet their deductibles.It’s hard to estimate how much you could owe if you don’t get a waiver, but the Kaiser Family Foundation provided some ballpark estimates for a pneumonia hospitalization and concluded that the total cost could be over $20,000 — with an individual’s out-of-pocket costs running around $1,300. All of those figures depend on what plan you have, where you get care and how serious a case you have.No one knows whether employers, insurers or the federal government will eventually decide to completely cover these costs, although Joseph R. Biden Jr., the leading Democratic contender for president, has suggested providing emergency funds to cover treatment.And some hospital systems are putting a pause on collections. CommonSpirit Health, a Catholic chain of hospitals and clinics, says it is suspending patient billing for coronavirus testing and treatment as it sorts out how the various parties will handle patients’ out-of-pocket costs.You may be at risk if you get care from someone, like an emergency room doctor or anesthesiologist, who is out of your plan’s network, even if the hospital is in your network. When Kaiser did its analysis, it found that nearly one in five patients admitted to the hospital with a serious case of pneumonia faced out-of-network bills.Updated May 20, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Probably not. Even if they don’t like them, “insurers are used to surprises,” said Gregory Fann, an actuary at Axene Health Partners in Temecula, Calif. “That’s what they are there for.”Most insurers have plenty of capital, and state regulators also keep an eye on them to make sure the companies can pay their medical claims.And your premiums won’t go up during the current year — insurers set their prices for a whole year so you don’t have to worry about any immediate jumps in costs. But there are some predictions that next year’s premiums could soar if the pandemic adds tens of billions of dollars in costs that insurers and employers must pay.It’s difficult to predict what will happen to businesses, which are under a lot of strain right now, and their ability to cover your medical claims. Companies that experience a surge in health care costs just as sales are plummeting could face a financial crisis that makes them unable to pay medical claims.You should be able to get covered. If you lose your job, you may qualify for Medicaid or be able to sign up for a health plan under the Affordable Care Act.A growing number of states are also creating a special enrollment period for residents who want to sign up, and there is even some talk of the federal government making a similar decision for the marketplaces they operate. There’s also talk of using the Medicaid program much more broadly to cover the uninsured.