Unproven Stem Cell Therapy Gets OK for Testing in Coronavirus Patients
By Katie ThomasAn experimental stem cell therapy derived from human placentas will begin early testing in patients with the coronavirus, a New Jersey biotech company said Thursday.The treatment, being developed by the company Celularity, has not yet been used on any patients with symptoms of Covid-19, but it has caught the attention of Rudy Giuliani, President Trump’s personal lawyer. Mr. Giuliani recently featured an interview with the company founder on his website and said on Twitter that the product has “real potential,” while also criticizing the Food and Drug Administration for not moving more quickly to approve potential remedies.There is no proven treatment for the respiratory disease, but several experimental approaches, including old malaria drugs and H.I.V. antivirals, are being tested in patients around the world.Celularity has also enthusiastically publicized the news of its early-stage trial for its treatment, known as Cynk-001. In an email Wednesday to a reporter, its public relations firm described a development as the “first F.D.A. approval for Covid-19 cell therapy.” The agency’s decision, however, merely gives a green light for its product to be used in a clinical trial, not widely prescribed to patients.In recent weeks, the established scientific process of evaluating a drug’s safety and effectiveness has been upended by Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly promoted the potential of two long-used malaria drugs that have shown mainly anecdotal evidence of helping patients. On Saturday, the F.D.A. took the unusual step of approving those drugs to treat hospitalized patients with coronavirus on an emergency basis, even though no significant clinical trials have yet been done.The early trial by Celularity — which will primarily evaluate safety, as well as an initial look at efficacy — will test its therapy in up to 86 patients with symptoms. They will receive infusions of the cell therapy, in the hopes it will prevent them from developing the more severe form of the disease, Dr. Robert Hariri, Celularity’s founder and chief executive, said in an interview Wednesday.“The objective here is preventative,” Dr. Hariri said. “If the timing of giving this can prevent those patients who have early disease from progressing to the more serious, life-threatening form, it could be a very, very useful tool.”The therapy involves using stem cells from the placenta — known as “natural killer” cells — that help protect a developing fetus or newborn from viruses that have infected the mother. Celularity has been testing these cells in cancer patients.Dr. Hariri said the trial, which would not include a placebo control group, will take place at academic medical centers around the country. He said the company expected to see initial results about 30 to 60 days after the first patients receive their dose. If this study is successful, Dr. Hariri said, the company would move to a placebo-controlled study that would evaluate the drug’s efficacy against the disease.At least one outside expert said the approach could present safety risks. Paul Knoepfler, a stem cell researcher at the University of California, Davis, said that patients with coronavirus can develop severe reactions where their immune systems go too far in attacking cells in their lungs, causing damaging inflammation. Other cell therapies tested in China are designed to dampen the immune response. He said one risk with the natural killer cells is they could go in the other direction, exacerbating respiratory problems “by massive killing of the patients’ respiratory cells.”Despite the scant evidence, Mr. Giuliani has become an early booster, interviewing Dr. Hariri on a podcast published on his website Saturday, and praising the treatment on Twitter, saying, “this therapy has real potential.” In a tweet on Saturday, he added, “Let’s hope F.D.A. can recognize that their cumbersome process designed to keep us safer, if it is not altered dramatically in times of great need, can result in unimaginable loss of human life.”Around the same time, Twitter deleted a post by Mr. Giuliani that it said violated its rules. The tweet, from March 27, made unfounded claims about the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine, one of the treatments that Mr. Trump has supported.Dr. Hariri said that he has known Mr. Giuliani for years and that the appearance on his podcast was “a friendly chat between people who know each other and who share a common interest in this particular response to this disease.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.He said that he has no business relationship with Mr. Giuliani, and that Mr. Giuliani is not representing him in any way, either paid or unpaid. “I don’t have anything to do with what the mayor tweets or whatnot, and I don’t agree or disagree with anything,” he said.Dr. Hariri said the company would follow the established process for testing whether a drug works. “We have waited for the F.D.A. to complete their review, which they did in a heroic and quick fashion,” he said.On Wednesday evening — the same day the F.D.A. approved his trial — Dr. Hariri praised the appearance by the agency’s commissioner, Dr. Stephen Hahn, on the conservative Fox News talk show “The Ingraham Angle.”