F.D.A. Bans Faulty Masks, 3 Weeks After Failed Tests
By Jack Nicas and Sheila KaplanFor three weeks the Food and Drug Administration allowed the sale of several types of N95-style face masks for American health care workers despite evidence from other parts of the federal government that the masks were not effective for blocking the coronavirus.Millions of these masks, produced in China, have been bought by or donated to American hospitals and distributed to others on the front line of the Covid-19 outbreak. Starting in mid-April, tests conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention revealed that some of the products did not meet medical standards for protection against the coronavirus.But it wasn’t until Thursday that the F.D.A. barred more than 65 of the 80 authorized manufacturers in China from exporting N95-style face masks to the United States for medical use, citing poor quality.“While the F.D.A. continues to take action to balance the urgent need of supplies of respirators for health care personnel, we are also doing everything in our authority to ensure health care personnel receive adequate protection,” an F.D.A. spokeswoman said in a statement. She added that the agency would collaborate with the C.D.C. to increase the supply of masks and ensure their integrity.She did not comment on the delay between the failed tests and the F.D.A.’s action.N95 masks, many of which are also produced in China, provide better protection against coronavirus particles than cloth or surgical masks, and are coveted by health care providers and emergency medical workers. On April 3, drastic shortages of the N95 masks led the F.D.A. to allow imports of similar masks, also from China. Millions of them have been imported.These masks, known as KN95, were never tested by American regulators, but were required to be vetted by an accredited test laboratory, which can be outside the United States, showing that they met the standards of the C.D.C. Those standards call for filtering 95 percent of particles that are 0.3 microns or larger, including the new coronavirus.As an additional safeguard, the C.D.C. and the F.D.A. initiated their own review to make sure the masks met these performance standards. On Thursday, the F.D.A. said that too many of them failed to filter out a sufficient percentage of particles.In tests of about 11 masks that the F.D.A. had authorized to be sold to American hospitals, seven flunked. One mask removed as little as 24 to 35 percent of particles, according to a C.D.C. test on April 15. Others just barely missed the cut, such as masks from DaddyBaby, a company in Fuzhou, China, that typically makes diapers. Those masks removed between 91 percent and 93.5 percent of particles.The health agencies also tested some KN95 masks that did not have agency approval. One of these, the F.D.A. said, blocked roughly 1 percent of the particles. While the C.D.C. tested only about 10 masks that had been allowed, the F.D.A. removed all other masks from its list that hadn’t yet been tested and gave their manufacturers 45 days to get tests in order to be reinstated.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]Many of the tests were conducted weeks ago, according to C.D.C. documents, yet the F.D.A. didn’t remove the masks until Thursday. It was unclear why there was such a delay. It was also unclear how many of the faulty masks were sold to American health care workers, where they ended up and whether the U.S. government was tracking that number. An F.D.A. spokeswoman didn’t immediately respond to questions on the issue.Hospitals and health care workers have been wary of KN95 masks, but because of the shortage of official N95 masks, many have ended up with them anyhow.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Last month, the New England Patriots football team used its plane to transport roughly one million masks from China to Massachusetts, drawing positive headlines even from the New York newspapers. A week later, medical workers began expressing concerns that the masks that Massachusetts officials purchased were not the top-of-the-line N95 respirators, but rather lower-grade KN95 masks that were potentially not safe to use while caring for coronavirus patients.“We are not using these on Covid 19 patient areas or in any areas,” Michael Augustine, the supply chain director at Harrington Memorial Hospital in Southbridge, Mass., said in an email at the time. “The packaging on the masks state they are not to be used in medical and surgical environments. These are essentially parked in storage and will not be utilized.”