You Can Help Break the Chain of Transmission
By Siobhan RobertsA simple tree diagram shows how limiting contacts early might prevent many infections.If each infected person spreads the coronavirus to two other people, the chain of infections would grow exponentially.Avoiding even one social transmission early on in the chain could significantly reduce the number of infections.InfectionavoidedIf each infected person spreads the coronavirus to two other people, the chain of infections would grow exponentially.Avoiding even one social transmission early on in the chain could significantly reduce the number of infections.InfectionavoidedIf each infected person spreads the coronavirus to two other people, the chain of infections would grow exponentially.Avoiding even one social transmission early on in the chain could significantly reduce the number of infections.InfectionavoidedIf each infected person spreads the coronavirus to two other people, the chain of infections would grow exponentially.Avoiding even one social transmission early on in the chain could significantly reduce the number of infections.InfectionavoidedIf each infected person spreads the coronavirus to two other people, the chain of infections would grow exponentially.Avoiding even a single social connection early on in the chain could significantly reduce the number of infections.InfectionavoidedBy Jonathan CorumAfter studying infectious diseases, epidemiologists like Helen Jenkins, of Boston University, and Bill Hanage, of Harvard, who are married, typically go one of two ways.“They either become completely and utterly infection conscious,” Dr. Hanage said, “or they are the type of person who drops the toast and picks it up and wipes it off and eats it.”“We would mostly be in the second category, but this has pushed us into the first category fairly visibly,” he continued, adding, “when the facts change, I update my priors” — a statistician’s term for what one believes and expects.With the coronavirus pandemic, the facts update daily. To adapt, Dr. Hanage, who studies and teaches the evolution and epidemiology of infectious diseases, broadly embraced the guiding principle that he conveys to his students: “Come on, you’ve got to think like the pathogen! Try to see it from the point of view of the pathogens and their evolution. What is going to be most helpful to them? What is going to enable them to leave the most descendants?”Recently, the family — Dr. Jenkins and Dr. Hanage, and their two daughters, ages 10 and 7 — gathered around their homemade whiteboard in the kitchen. Dr. Jenkins, whose work focuses on tuberculosis, which still kills about 4,000 people daily around the world, drew a simple tree diagram, as a way to clearly convey the value of cutting just one link in the coronavirus transmission chain.The basic message: Very simple interventions, such as working from home and severing even one link, have an exponential effect. Every individual acting preemptively can make a huge difference.“I started working from home a long time ago,” Dr. Hanage said.“It was just a week ago,” Dr. Jenkins noted.“Right, it was just a week ago,” he said.“It feels like a year ago,” Dr. Jenkins said. “At the same time, we pulled our kids from school. And we spent the first part of last week urging parents in our local community to pull their kids from school, if they could. It was quite a difficult week.”transcriptI would just say enjoy your home. Stay. I would just say, right now. We have to get this problem fixed. Welcome to Miami!It was also a week of trying to keep up with work already planned, and of writing op-eds in The Guardian and The Washington Post on topics including testing issues in the United States, working from home and the controversial pandemic strategy in Britain. Their older daughter has daily Google Hangout meetings with her class and, with a friend, is creating a coronavirus PowerPoint information guide for their peers. There are whirlwind conference calls with colleagues, and live feeds with local and international radio and TV stations.During one live interview this week, the couple’s 7-year-old daughter passed Dr. Hanage a note that read: “I’m lonely. I just just just hope it will be family day.” So far, family time focuses around Jenga play sessions, and dinner, followed by a nightly viewing of the 90s sitcom Frasier. “It makes us laugh, which is much needed,” Dr. Jenkins said — although she added that at the sight of anyone onscreen shaking hands, “I do find myself wincing.”The following is an edited version of my phone and email conversations with Dr. Jenkins and Dr. Hanage, who were at their home in Cambridge, Mass.Tell us about the tree diagram.HJ: It simply shows what happens if you cut even one contact that would have resulted in transmission.A tree diagram is not the type of thing epidemiologists would usually draw, because it seems obvious. But clearly we still need to do better at getting these concepts across to people.BH: I build a lot of trees, but they are phylogenetic trees. My lab is very interested in figuring out ways of using genetics to detect transmission. The thing on our whiteboard is just a transmission tree. Every time you cut a link, you don’t just take out that link, you also take out all the potential cases and links descending from it. Those people could be infected by other means, later on, but every time each of us stops — or even just delays — an infection is a small victory.HJ: I still feel really concerned about the complacency among so many people — people thinking that what happened in Wuhan, China, or Italy can’t possibly happen here. It’s really hard to see people in the U.K. and the U.S. not taking the problem seriously, and putting themselves and others at risk.But individuals can do so much, too, because of the exponential increase of cases in an outbreak.BH: It’s really instructive to compare what happened in Wuhan and what happened in Guangzhou. In Wuhan, they shut down when they had 495 cases in a city that is roughly the size of New York. In neighboring Guangzhou, by contrast, they took action when there were seven cases. The epidemic curve in Guangzhou was completely manageable. As we all know, in Wuhan it was absolutely …HJ: Catastrophic.BH: It led to the crisis in the hospitals. And this is the thing that is really important: The peak demand for critical care was roughly a month after the restrictions were put in place.Right, so here we are, all doing some degree of extreme social distancing or sheltering at home. When will the peak hit? In a month?BH: It could be a month from now, it could be longer. I want to be wary of getting into the weeds of complicated modeling or predictions. Instead, what I want to get across is: We know that this is a virus capable of doing what it did to Wuhan, and what it is now doing in Italy and Spain and what it will almost certainly do in the U.K. Washington State is coming under severe strain. Given what we know the virus is capable of, we should be preparing for it now.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.HJ: We should have been preparing months ago.And how long are the restrictions likely to last. When does it end? The report released Monday from modelers at Imperial College London suggested that we could be in for a long haul.HJ: It’s a marathon, not a sprint. Everyone needs to come to terms psychologically with the idea that this is going to last a long time. It’s going to be a long-term effort to “flatten the curve.” If we can successfully bring down the case numbers to a manageable level, then we can reassess the situation. By then, we will hopefully have more science to inform our decision-making, and we will have ramped up testing capacity substantially.We all must social-distance as much as possible to limit the impact. Utmost in my mind at the moment are the health care workers, some of whom are my friends, who are going to be on the front lines. They are the heroes, and by limiting transmission, we are all helping them do their jobs and save lives.And the risks and interventions will change over time, as people better understand the situation. We should not think that this will blow over in a few weeks and then life will resume as it was before.BH: Sustainability is a completely reasonable thing to be worried about. But it’s not an excuse for not taking urgent action now. We must not let the perfect be the enemy of the good.The most sustainable measures will be put in place when the incidence of infection is low. Because when the incidence is high, the only way to save lives will be with really extreme interventions — the lockdowns, police on the streets like we have seen in Italy.Coronavirus may not be dangerous to most people. But it is transmissible enough to infect a very large number of people. And even a small fraction of a very large number can be a large number — certainly enough to overwhelm our health care system.It’s important to distinguish between the short term and the long term. The long term is hard to predict, but there are a lot of things we can do now, and many of them are common sense. As I keep saying: It’s epidemiology, not rocket science!The uncertainty and unpredictability are confounding.