China Will Admit International Experts to Help Contain Coronavirus Outbreak
By Roni Caryn RabinAfter repeatedly declining assistance from international health officials, Chinese authorities agreed on Tuesday to permit teams of experts coordinated by the World Health Organization to visit China to help contain the growing coronavirus outbreak.The news arrived as federal health officials announced expanded screening measures for passengers from China at 20 ports of entry to the United States.Other travel restrictions have not been ruled out, officials said, though so far only five people in the United States are known to have been infected. Americans are now discouraged from traveling to any part of China.At a news briefing in Washington on Tuesday, Alex M. Azar II, the secretary of health and human services — who had just reiterated the offer of scientific and logistical assistance — said he was “delighted” that China was accepting.The Chinese authorities agreed to work with experts from other countries after a meeting between President Xi Jinping and Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director general of the W.H.O.The W.H.O. praised China’s response to the outbreak, including its rapid identification of the virus and its “openness to sharing information with W.H.O. and other countries.”Though the outbreak is continuing in China, federal officials maintained that the risk of infection remains low in the United States.“Right now, there is no spread of this virus in our communities at home,” Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said at the news briefing.“The coming days and weeks are likely to bring more cases, including the possibility of person-to-person spread,” he added. “Our goal is to contain this virus and prevent sustained spread of the virus in our country.”The C.D.C. has already been screening arrivals from Wuhan, China — epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak — for symptoms of infection at five airports.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]But the agency also oversees a comprehensive quarantine system, including permanent quarantine stations at 20 airports and land border crossings that are staffed with medical officers who routinely screen ill passengers and decide whether they can enter the United States.Those stations will be equipped and staffed to perform screenings specifically for the Wuhan coronavirus, officials said at the briefing.“Americans should know this is a potentially very serious public health threat, but at this point Americans should not worry for their own safety,” Mr. Azar said. “This is a very fast-moving, constantly changing situation.”American scientists are eager to review data that Chinese health officials have said indicates the virus may be transmitted from an infected individual to other people even before the patient shows symptoms.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.So far, the C.D.C. has not been able to confirm that transmissions may occur while patients are asymptomatic, Dr. Redfield said.It’s a question that could have implications for the spread of the Wuhan coronavirus, and affect screening measures and other public health steps that must be taken, said Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.Asymptomatic transmission is not believed to be a large factor in viral outbreaks. “The driver of an outbreak has always been a symptomatic person,” Dr. Fauci said. “An epidemic is not driven by asymptomatic carriers.”There was no evidence that people were contagious before they showed symptoms during outbreaks of other coronavirus diseases, like SARS and MERS, which might suggest that such transmission is unlikely with the new coronavirus.Dr. Redfield said the C.D.C. could not rule out additional measures as scientists learned more about the new coronavirus.“All options have to be on the table, including travel restrictions,” he said. “But diseases are not terribly good at respecting borders.”