Shifting Ground in Coronavirus Fight: U.S. Will Evacuate Americans From Cruise Ship
By Vivian Wang, Motoko Rich and Keith BradsherFor much of this past week, as a dangerous viral outbreak continued to rattle the world, officials seemed keen to offer reassurances. Chinese leaders urged people to get back to work. American officials said they saw no need to evacuate citizens from a quarantined cruise ship in Japan.In a sign of how unpredictable the crisis still is, and how quickly officials have had to adapt their responses, both of those declarations had at least partly unraveled by Saturday.Communist Party leaders said people returning to the Chinese capital would have to isolate themselves for two weeks, potentially delaying any economic revival. American officials announced that they would charter a flight to evacuate American citizens from the cruise ship, after citing heightened danger to those on board.The shifting policies underscore the rapidly evolving terrain of one of the most serious global public health crises in recent years, even as China’s leader, Xi Jinping, said this past week that the crisis was improving. The outbreak has been marked by confusion and conflicting analysis of the available information. [Read the latest updates on the coronavirus epidemic here.]The number of confirmed cases of the coronavirus disease, named COVID-19, continued to climb on Saturday, and their geographic locations continued to spread. The virus claimed its first life outside Asia when an 80-year-old Chinese tourist died in France, according to the French health minister. It was the fourth death outside mainland China.A day earlier, the outbreak also reached Africa for the first time, with Egypt reporting the continent’s first confirmed case.On Sunday morning, the Chinese authorities reported 2,009 new cases and 142 deaths in the previous 24 hours. In all, 68,500 infections and 1,665 deaths have been confirmed. The American Embassy in Tokyo, explaining the evacuation decision to American citizens on board the cruise ship on Saturday, acknowledged the rapid changes. “This is a dynamic situation,” the embassy said in an emailed letter.The ship, the Diamond Princess, has been quarantined for more than a week at the port of Yokohama, after the coronavirus was diagnosed in a man who had disembarked days earlier in Hong Kong. About 3,700 passengers and crew members were aboard when the quarantine was imposed, including more than 400 Americans.For days, United States officials had assured American passengers that evacuation was not necessary, even as more than 200 cases were diagnosed on board. On Feb. 8, the embassy told American passengers in a letter that “remaining in your room on the ship is the safest option to minimize your risk of infection.”But Saturday’s letter made clear that the calculus had changed.“To fulfill our government’s responsibilities to U.S. citizens,” the letter said, the U.S. government recommended “that U.S. citizens disembark and return to the United States.” In a later message, the embassy said that passengers who did not leave on the charter flight would not be able to fly to the United States until March 4 at the earliest. American officials also said previously that the American passengers would not have to be quarantined upon their return to the United States. But the embassy’s email on Saturday said the evacuees would need to be quarantined for two more weeks once they arrived.While the letter did not explicitly give a reason for the change, an official with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggested on Friday that the authorities had re-evaluated the ship’s conditions.“The data coming out of Japan suggests there’s a higher risk among the people on the ship,” the official, Dr. Nancy Messonnier, said during a news briefing.Sixty-seven new cases were announced aboard the ship on Saturday, the most in a single day since the quarantine began.The American government’s announcement seemed to trigger a chain reaction among other countries. Minutes after the United States Embassy’s letter was sent, the Australian Embassy in Tokyo sent its own email to its citizens aboard the Diamond Princess, citing the American evacuation plans and assuring Australians that it was “examining options.”The Italian foreign minister also said on Saturday the country would do what was necessary “to protect our citizens” aboard the ship.Within China, a flurry of new announcements reinforced the government’s continuing efforts to recalibrate its balance of economic and public health concerns.The mandatory two-week self-quarantine for people returning to Beijing was announced late on Friday evening on the website of Chinese state-run television. Millions of migrant workers who power China’s economy had left urban centers to celebrate the Lunar New Year holiday last month.Those who did not comply with the rules would “be held accountable according to law,” according to a text of the order released by state television.But the policy, issued by Communist Party officials at the municipal level, seemed at odds with the message from Chinese national officials this past week. They had urged local officials to get businesses up and running again, and to help factories eliminate bureaucratic hurdles.Mr. Xi, at a meeting of the Communist Party’s top leadership on Wednesday, said government officials at all levels should “strive to achieve this year’s economic and social development goals and tasks,” according to a summary of his remarks by state media.After the Beijing restrictions were announced, some on Chinese social media observed that workers had already been streaming back to the capital for days, and they wondered how effective the new rules would be.It was not the first time that Chinese officials had sent mixed signals about their desire to get people back to work. The same day that a top economic official urged factories to restart, a national health official said that the return of workers to major cities could foster new outbreaks in populous provinces with high populations of migrant factory workers.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.In another possible hurdle to economic revival, a top Chinese banking official said on Saturday that commercial banks must disinfect and stash any cash they collect before releasing it back to customers.Behind it all is uncertainty, and increasing diplomatic tension, about the scope of the outbreak.While the World Health Organization has praised China’s response to the crisis, American officials in recent days have privately expressed doubts about whether China is underreporting cases, as well as about the official timeline for the first infections.Chinese officials have been adamant that they have been transparent. On Friday, Wang Yi, the Chinese foreign minister, attacked what he called some countries’ “overreaction” to the outbreak.“We have the confidence, capability and determination to prevail over the virus at an early date,” Mr. Wang said in an interview with Reuters.Still, the Chinese authorities have acknowledged the difficulty in knowing the outbreak’s precise scale. On Thursday, officials added more than 14,800 new cases to the tally of those infected, the largest one-day increase recorded so far. They attributed the jump to a change in the way they diagnosed confirmed cases.The United States will also widen its search for possible infections: American health officials in five cities will begin testing some people with flulike symptoms for the coronavirus, according to Dr. Messonnier of the C.D.C.The constant changes have left people caught in the middle of the outbreak confused and frustrated.Rachel Torres, 24, a newlywed on the cruise ship quarantined in Japan, said that she and her husband, Tyler, would take the evacuation flight, though they were frustrated that it had not been offered earlier.Gay Courter, 75, an American novelist from Crystal River, Fla., near Tampa, said she and her husband, Philip, would also leave the ship despite the unexpected quarantine period.“This is what we’ve been asking for, because we never felt quarantine on this ship was safe,” she said.