South Korea Confirms a Jump in Coronavirus Infections
This briefing has ended. Read the latest developments in the coronavirus outbreak here. South Korea said on Friday that the number of confirmed cases of coronavirus infections rose to 156, a near tripling over three days.Among the 52 new cases reported on Friday, 41 are in Daegu, a city of about two and half million people in the southeastern part of the country, and the surrounding region, South Korean disease control officials said in a statement. Among those, 39 were connected to a church called Shincheonji.Officials said a 61-year-old woman who had attended services at the church over the past two Sundays had been identified as a potential source of the spread of the virus.[Read: ‘Proselytizing robots’: Inside South Korean church at outbreak’s center.]The new figures give South Korea the world’s second largest number of confirmed cases if those from the Diamond Princess cruise ship are not included in Japan’s total. The vast majority of cases are in mainland China, which has reported more than 75,000 cases. Japan has 94 cases, which does not include the more than 600 people who had been on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship.South Korea reported on Thursday what officials said could be its first death from the coronavirus. A 63-year-old patient with symptoms of pneumonia died on Wednesday at the Daenam Hospital in Cheongdo.Public health officials are studying clusters of coronavirus cases that have emerged in Japan, searching for clues about how far the epidemic will expand beyond its center in China.The issue has taken on greater urgency as hundreds of passengers disembark from the Diamond Princess, the cruise ship in Yokohama where 621 people have tested positive for the virus. Japan declared the ship’s two-week quarantine over, despite an uptick in cases among the passengers still onboard.Alarmed officials are rushing to learn more about how the virus is transmitted, including how many of those infected experience mild symptoms or none at all, and to what extent it can be spread by people who experience no symptoms.Virologists see two likely explanations for the spread of clusters. In one, a “superspreading event,” a person who has the propensity to spew more germs than others transmits the virus to a large group of people. Alternatively, people can independently catch a virus from contaminated surfaces. It is unclear how long the new coronavirus can survive on surfaces, but studies of other such viruses have found they can stay active for a week or more.On Thursday, a Japanese health ministry official said two infected passengers who were quarantined on the ship had died. The two, both Japanese, were an 87-year-old man and an 84-year-old woman, the Japanese broadcaster NHK reported. Both had underlying health issues, the broadcaster said.The authorities have said they are releasing only people who have tested negative for the virus — though testing has been unreliable — and are showing no symptoms. But experts on infectious diseases have pointed to deficiencies in the quarantine protocols on the ship and questioned the decision to let them go free.The coronavirus may be spreading fear and anxiety around the world, but adults middle-age and older, and particularly men, appear to be the most at risk.This week, Chinese researchers published the largest analysis of coronavirus cases to date. They found that although men and women have been infected in roughly equal numbers, the death rate among men was 2.8 percent, compared with 1.7 percent among women.A number of factors may be working against men, some biological and some rooted in lifestyle, researchers say.When it comes to mounting an immune response against infections, men are the weaker sex.“There’s something about the immune system in females that is more exuberant,” said Dr. Janine Clayton, director of the Office of Research on Women’s Health at the National Institutes of Health.Health behaviors that differ by sex in some societies may also play a role in disparate responses to infections.China has the largest population of smokers in the world, 316 million people. But just over 2 percent of Chinese women smoke, compared with more than half of all men.Beyond that, some studies suggest that women may be more proactive about seeking health care. With the coronavirus, Chinese researchers have found, delayed treatment can have serious consequences.With more than half of China’s population now under some form of lockdown, and its economy nearly at a standstill, business leaders and economists are increasingly arguing that Beijing’s efforts to fight the coronavirus are hurting people’s lives and livelihoods while doing little to the stop the virus’s spread.If the country becomes poorer because of emergency health measures, they say, public health could deteriorate more than it would from the outbreak itself. “Strike a balance that is conducive to protecting lives,” wrote James Liang, the executive chairman of Trip.com, China’s dominant online travel agency, in a widely circulated essay this week.The debate — including questions about whether mandatory 14-day quarantines, roadblocks and checkpoints are really necessary in areas where there have been few cases — is unusual in a country where dissent is frequently censored.Experts say there may be a middle ground between helping the economy and fighting the virus. A very strong emphasis on hand washing and on the immediate isolation of the sick may be more effective than mass quarantines, said Jennifer Huang Bouey, a Georgetown University epidemiologist.On Thursday, officials in Beijing announced steps to help businesses struggling with the impact of the coronavirus.Chinese health authorities announced on Thursday that they were using new criteria to count cases of the coronavirus, appearing to undo a change they had announced just a week ago.That earlier change allowed health officials in Hubei Province — the hardest-hit area of the outbreak — to count cases diagnosed in clinical settings, including with the use of CT scans showing lung infections, not just those confirmed using specialized kits to test for the virus. The government in Hubei has been confronted with a severe shortage of testing kits and hospital beds, and officials described the use of CT scans and clinical symptoms as a way to help identify more patients and get them into needed care. But the government said Hubei would now resume using the same criteria as the rest of the country. Cases will be considered confirmed only if the virus is found.On Friday, Chinese officials said there were 889 new cases in the previous 24 hours, raising the overall total above 75,000. The death toll went up by 118, to 2,236.The change in methodogies has caused confusion among public health experts, who say it is now even more difficult to track the outbreak.“For an epidemiologist, it’s really frustrating when case definitions keep on changing,” said Benjamin Cowling, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Hong Kong. “Why can’t they work out what’s a probable, suspected and confirmed case? It’s totally confusing.”Health officials have run into problems with the viral tests, which can be difficult to conduct and often turn up false negatives. It also takes at least two days to process the results.But lung scans are also an imperfect means to diagnose patients, leading to the possibility of an overcount. Even patients with ordinary seasonal flu may develop pneumonia visible on a lung scan.On Thursday, the number of new cases in the previous 24 hours fell sharply across the country, to 394, from 1,749 the day before, according to data from Chinese health officials. It was not immediately clear whether the decline was a result of changes in how the Chinese government defines cases.The total number of infections in the country reached 74,576 on Thursday. There were 114 more deaths in the country on Wednesday, bringing the toll to 2,118..Trials of two drug therapies against the coronavirus are beginning in China, World Health Organization officials said on Thursday. Early results may be available within three weeks.One trial involves remdesivir, an experimental antiviral drug made by Gilead. It has not yet been licensed for use in any disease. The drug was tested against the Ebola virus in Congo, where it was not very effective. But when it was given to the first American known to be infected with the coronavirus, an unidentified man in Washington State, he recovered.The second treatment that is undergoing a trial is of a combination of two anti-H.I.V. drugs, ritonavir and lopinavir. That combination is sold as Kaletra in the United States and available in generic versions. If either therapy helps prevent severe pneumonia, sepsis or organ failure in coronavirus patients, death rates may fall. Right now, almost 5 percent become critically ill and 2.3 percent die, according to the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention.Those figures rates are based on an initial study of almost 45,000 patients released by the China C.D.C. on Monday. Two other drugs, favipiravir and chloroquine, have been discussed as possible coronavirus treatments because they have shown some effectiveness in laboratory tests.With the epidemic darkening the mood across China, the Communist Youth League apparently thought the nation’s youth would appreciate some new, patriotic cartoon mascots. It was wrong.The Communist Party’s youth wing unveiled, then quickly canned, two new animated spokesmen this week, after receiving a torrent of online mockery and criticism.The derisive response suggested that China’s social media generation may be tiring of the party’s efforts to make propaganda fun and relatable, especially at this moment of fear and frustration with government officials.The league’s new digital avatars were styled like anime characters and were called Hong Qi Man and Jiang Shan Jiao, names derived from Chairman Mao’s poetry. They were supposed to function like the nationalistic rap songs, viral videos and other projects by the Communist Party meant to win over younger audiences.Instead, they sparked a backlash, as internet users expressed disbelief that the government would roll out such a campaign during a national crisis.Some social media users also pummeled the female character, Jiang Shan Jiao, with questions about the challenges that women face in China.“Jiang Shan Jiao, when a teacher sexually harasses you, are you forced to drop out of school?” asks a person in a video on the social platform WeChat. Another asks, “Jiang Shan Jiao, when your husband hits you, do the police respond?” Still another asked: “Jiang Shan Jiao, do you shave your hair for your country?” The question referred to a recent video, circulated by state-run news media, featuring female medical workers having their heads shaved before marching off to Wuhan, the center of the epidemic. The video was panned on Chinese social media as exploitative.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.A group of Russian Cossacks is sending patrols into a Chinatown in the Ural Mountains in search of people who they fear may be spreading the coronavirus, Russian news outlets reported on Thursday.The patrols have raised the prospect of vigilante violence targeting Chinese people as fears over the virus grow, but the patrol organizers insist that is not happening.The three-man patrols approach people who sneeze or cough and recommend that they visit a hospital, Znak.com reported, citing the group’s leader, Gennady Kovalyov. They also hand out face masks in the Chinese neighborhood. “This is our little help for society,” Mr. Kovalyov said. “There are no statistics on the success of our action, but thanks to the masks at least somebody won’t be infected.” Such groups have previously coordinated with the Russian police for crowd control but are not part of the government.In neighboring Ukraine, residents of a village tried to block a road leading to a rural clinic where Ukrainians evacuated from the Chinese province of Hubei will be quarantined for two weeks.President Volodymyr Zelensky responded by assuring Ukrainians that the evacuees had showed no signs of illness when they left China and that precautions were being taken to prevent the virus from spreading in Ukraine.“But there is another danger I would like to mention,” he said in a statement. “The danger of forgetting that we are all human and we are all Ukrainian.”Amazon, which typically stocks more than 100 million items and relies heavily on Chinese manufacturing, is becoming a case study in how a giant retailer grapples with the fallout from the coronavirus.As the outbreak shuts or slows factories in China, Amazon has responded by making larger and more frequent orders of Chinese-made products that had already been shipped to the United States, trying to keep up its inventory. Some sellers have also reduced their advertising and promotions on the site so they don’t run out of products.The company — which is likely to feel potential shortages of goods earlier than its peers because it usually keeps fewer items on hand — also sent an urgent email to brands about Prime Day, its large midsummer sale, indicating that it has begun worrying about inventory for the event.Some of the potential supply problem may be hidden, since even products made in America can rely on Chinese suppliers.Procter & Gamble, the consumer products giant, said in a federal filing on Thursday that disruptions to supply and demand caused by the coronavirus outbreak would “materially” affect the company’s quarterly results.The company relies on 387 suppliers in China, each facing difficulties in resuming operations, Jon R. Moeller, the chief operating officer and chief financial officer, said at a conference in New York, according to the filing. He said the virus was also reducing department store traffic in many major Asian metropolitan areas, “with many stores closed or operating with reduced hours.”“China is our second largest market — sales and profit,” he said. “Some of the demand has shifted online but supply of delivery operators and labor is limited.”“The operating challenges change with the hour, and of course the path of the virus is unknown, making it very difficult to provide precise estimates of impact,” he added.Despite the expected drag in the current quarter, the company still stood by its guidance for the fiscal year ending June 30, according to the statement. It said last month that it expected annual sales growth of 4 to 5 percent.Procter & Gamble on Thursday also confirmed that all eight of its manufacturing plants and six out of eight distribution centers in China have restarted operations, as first reported by the Cincinnati Business Courier. The dollar climbed to its highest level in years this week, reflecting the American economy’s strength against a global backdrop clouded by the coronavirus.Japan, Britain and Germany have issued pessimistic updates that have added to the uncertainty created by the coronavirus, which all but idled China’s economy for weeks.American stocks and bonds have benefited, as global investors exchanged their currencies for dollars — pushing the value of the dollar higher — and then used those dollars to snap up financial assets.“People are spooked by the coronavirus, and the global economy is weakening. It’s struggling mightily,” said Bob Schwartz, a senior economist at Oxford Economics in New York. “And whenever this happens, you see a capital flight into dollar-denominated assets.”All 747 crew members remaining aboard the cruise ship Westerdam in Sihanoukville, Cambodia, have been tested for the coronavirus, and none of them were found to be infected, the cruise company, Holland America Line, announced Thursday.With these tests results, all 1,528 passengers and crew members who remained in Cambodia have tested negative for the virus and are cleared to leave the country, the cruise company said.The ship, which left Hong Kong on Feb. 1 with more than 2,200 people aboard, was turned away by ports in five countries before Cambodia agreed to let it dock a week ago.The company said there was never any sign of coronavirus aboard the ship, but one passenger, an 83-year-old American woman, was found to have the virus after she departed and was stopped by airport health inspectors in Malaysia.Holland America said Wednesday that all 781 passengers who remained in Cambodia had tested negative for the disease and were free to leave the country.Earlier this week, a comedian from Oregon who had performed on the Westerdam posted a video on YouTube boasting that he slipped out of his hotel and headed to the airport before his test results had come back. The man, Frank King, said in the video that he had eluded hotel security. KOMO-TV in Seattle reported that he arrived home on Monday. He said that he had been “cleared by the C.D.C.” and did not have any symptoms, but regretted his decision because of a backlash on social media. In an email to The Times on Thursday, he said that in hindsight, he would have chosen to stay “simply to avoid recrimination.”