As U.K. Deaths Mount, Political Terrain Gets Trickier for Boris Johnson
By Mark Landler and Stephen CastleLONDON — For Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain, the political risks of running up the worst death toll in Europe from the coronavirus became starkly clear on Wednesday in a near-empty House of Commons, where he faced off for the first time against the new leader of the opposition, Keir Starmer.Citing new statistics that suggest Britain, with more than 30,000 deaths, may have overtaken even hard-hit Italy, Mr. Starmer asked Mr. Johnson how he could claim “apparent success” in the response to the outbreak, as he did last week after he returned from his own serious bout with the virus.“That is not success — or apparent success,” Mr. Starmer said, his words hanging in the silence of a normally boisterous chamber. “Can the prime minister tell us, how on earth did it come to this?”Mr. Johnson replied that direct country-to-country comparisons were difficult and that the true human cost of the pandemic would only be clear after it was over. While statisticians generally agree with that assessment, Mr. Johnson implicitly acknowledged its weakness as a political argument.“He’s right to draw attention to the appalling statistics, not just in this country but of course around the world,” Mr. Johnson said.He tried to deflect attention from the death statistics by throwing out another number: 200,000 virus tests a day by the end of May. That is double the target the government set for April, which it reached on the last day of the month but has since fallen to below 70,000 — a failure that Mr. Starmer also pointed out.For Mr. Starmer, a human-rights lawyer who was elected leader of the Labour Party last month, it was a sure-footed debut against Mr. Johnson in Prime Minister’s Questions, a weekly ritual that usually unfolds in a rowdy din, as backbenchers whoop for their leader and rain catcalls on the other side.The pandemic has forced Parliament to allow lawmakers to attend remotely for the first time in its history, leaving Mr. Johnson and Mr. Starmer to face each other as if in a legal deposition rather than a freewheeling political arena.The quiet setting worked to the opposition leader’s advantage: With a subdued, forensic style, he pressed Mr. Johnson on lethal conditions in nursing homes; shortages of masks and gloves for health workers; and Britain’s decision to abandon testing and contact tracing in the early days of the contagion.Mr. Johnson was on the defensive partly because his government had presented comparative death statistics at daily briefings since the start of the pandemic. For weeks, as Italy and Spain struggled to contain their outbreaks, the numbers reflected well on Britain. But as the daily number of deaths in those countries has slowed, Britain has quickly caught up.Measured by the number of officially reported deaths, Britain surpassed Italy on Tuesday by slightly more than 100 people. On Wednesday, with 649 new deaths, Britain reported a total of 30,076 to Italy’s 29,684.A true comparison is harder to make because of differences in how the countries collect data — Britain recently began including nursing home deaths in its numbers; Italy does not — as well as lag times in reporting deaths outside hospitals. Analysts estimate that the actual numbers in both countries are much higher.British officials point out that on a per-capita basis, the country still lags behind Belgium, Spain and Italy. But the trajectory is clear: Britain could end up second only to the United States in total fatalities.So far, the public has been quite supportive of the government. But political analysts said the death toll poses a long-term threat to Mr. Johnson because it is an obvious symbol of what critics call his government’s mishandling of the crisis.“There is a fairly settled view that we were slow off the mark, and I think that is linked to the fact that our outcomes seem to be worse than those of some others in Europe,” said Stephen Dorrell, a former health secretary who until last year chaired the NHS Confederation, an umbrella group of organizations tied to the National Health Service.If anything, the prime minister was spared even harsher scrutiny of the death toll this week by a messy personal incident involving one of the government’s most prominent scientific advisers. The adviser — Neil Ferguson, an epidemiologist at Imperial College London — resigned after having admitted he violated a lockdown that he had recommended by illicitly meeting his lover at his home.The disclosure of Dr. Ferguson’s indiscretion by the Daily Telegraph set off a storm of critical coverage in the right-wing news media, which has vehemently opposed the lockdown. He was nicknamed “Naughty Neil” and criticized as a hypocrite for having failed to abide by the standards he sought to impose on others.Critics said they were alarmed by the exposure of Dr. Ferguson, which some said bodes ill for other scientists who have delivered difficult advice to the government on the virus and could be penalized for it.“That was a deliberate act to follow him around and see if you can get any dirt on him,” said David King, a former chief scientific adviser to the government now at Cambridge University. “It’s a way of pulling down the people who have been in favor, through scientific advice, of taking us into lockdown.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Dr. Ferguson’s resignation follows that of Scotland’s chief medical officer, Catherine Calderwood, after she made two visits to her second home in defiance of social distancing rules.Last month, the Johnson government’s housing, communities and local government secretary, Robert Jenrick, drew criticism for having traveled from London to a property he owns in rural Herefordshire during the lockdown.Journalists have also asked whether Mr. Johnson should have left London to recover at his official country residence, Chequers, and whether his partner, Carrie Symonds, should have joined him there.