Britain Placed Under a Virtual Lockdown by Boris Johnson
By Mark Landler and Stephen CastleLONDON — Facing a growing storm of criticism about his laissez-faire response to the fast-spreading coronavirus, Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced on Monday that he would place Britain under a virtual lockdown, closing all nonessential shops, banning meetings of more than two people, and requiring people to stay in their homes, except for trips for food or medicine.People who flout the new restrictions, the prime minister said, will be fined by the police.The steps, which Mr. Johnson outlined in a televised address to the nation, bring him into alignment with European leaders like President Emmanuel Macron of France and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, who have all but quarantined their countries in a desperate bid to slow the outbreak.“No prime minister wants to enact measures like this,” a grave Mr. Johnson said. “I know the damage that this disruption is doing and will do to people’s lives, to their businesses and to their jobs.”But while these were the most draconian restrictions placed on the British people since World War II, Mr. Johnson is still leaving a bit of breathing room.The prime minister said people also could leave their houses for exercise, either alone or with family members, and he did not close parks in London, which became a symbol of Britain’s nonchalant response this weekend when they were thronged with people.Nor is Britain requiring that people who leave the houses carry documents, as France now does. Mr. Johnson did not detail what fines those who did not comply with the rules would face.Still, as the wail of ambulance sirens echoed through London’s largely empty streets on Monday, there was evidence that Britons were belatedly coming to terms with the need for ordinary life to come to a halt.The number of confirmed cases in Britain rose to 6,650 on Monday, up from 5,683 a day earlier, while the death toll jumped by 54, to 335. British officials warn that the country is about two weeks behind Italy in the spread of the virus, suggesting that those numbers are about to balloon.Mr. Johnson has made substantial moves in the past week, closing schools as well as pubs, restaurants, gyms and theaters. But at every step, he has seemed like a leader acting under duress. And in several cases, his government was playing catch-up to a private sector that had already acted on its own.The Premier League canceled the rest of its soccer season before the government banned large sports gatherings. Parents began pulling children out of school before they were closed. Department stores, boutiques, hairdressers and other shops began closing before Mr. Johnson’s Monday directive.At times, Mr. Johnson’s earlier steps had sowed confusion. He initially asked people to avoid pubs but did not ask the pubs to close their doors, prompting some people, including his own father, Stanley Johnson, to declare they still planned to go.This weekend, images of crowds flouting social distancing rules in London parks under early-spring sunshine whipped up the political pressure for Mr. Johnson to do more. Among those calling for tougher measures was Keir Starmer, the front-runner to become the next leader of the opposition Labour Party.“In these extraordinary times, the government must now set out further compliance measures, such as those introduced in other countries,” Mr. Starmer wrote on Twitter. “These are vital days in the battle against the coronavirus.”Mr. Johnson’s response has come under growing criticism, even from right-leaning papers that are normally supportive of him.“Since the start he has appeared behind the curve,” said an editorial in The Times of London on Monday. “Considerable time that could have been spent preparing for the crisis appears to have been squandered.”Mr. Johnson, the paper said, risked being compared not to his hero, the wartime prime minister Winston Churchill, but to Churchill’s predecessor, Neville Chamberlain, who was discredited for his policy of appeasing Nazi Germany and uttered the fateful phrase, “peace for our time.”The government’s deliberations are also drawing more scrutiny, after The Sunday Times published a lengthy investigation of Mr. Johnson’s abrupt shift from a less-stringent approach to the virus to one that more closely aligns with the rigorous measures in France, Spain and Germany.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Italy shut down all nonessential businesses and industries on March 21. A day later, the Lombardy region, the epicenter of the country’s outbreak, banned all outdoor physical activity.Much of the criticism has fallen on Mr. Johnson himself. Commentators say he has veered from issuing stark warnings about the loss of life to lamenting that he has had to ask people to stop congregating at pubs.Although the prime minister has appeared on TV almost every day — usually flanked by his chief scientific and medical advisers — there has been little follow-up from the government about what kinds of social distancing rules people should adopt and what the risks of failing to do so are.Critics noted that the government spent large sums last year on an advertising campaign to prepare the public for Britain’s departure from the European Union. But it has failed to produce a coherent information campaign to clarify how people should observe the new social distancing rules.Britain has a legacy of producing effective advertising campaigns during health crises. In the 1980s, under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, the government aired commercials about the risks of transmitting AIDS that, while unpopular at the time, were credited with raising public awareness about the disease.The absence of a coronavirus campaign was more glaring given that other public service advertising has continued, some of it striking a discordant note. On one major TV channel Sunday, Mr. Johnson’s daily news briefing on coronavirus was followed by a government ad recruiting health workers to the National Health Service. It featured the slogan “there’s never been a better time to join us.”The prime minister’s prior reluctance to take restrictive measures, analysts said, is rooted in both his own libertarian streak and in the politics of his party. Mr. Johnson has long campaigned against the so-called nanny state, promising before he took office to lift taxes on sugary, salty and fatty foods. Some commentators said his live-and-let-live sensibility is rooted in his own less-than-tidy lifestyle.Defending civil liberties is also an article of faith in the Conservative Party. In 2010, a Conservative-led coalition government shelved the idea of national ID cards, after a fierce debate over whether they infringed on individual privacy.