Coronavirus Briefing: What Happened Today
By Patrick J. LyonsThis is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.Life has changed in the U.S.Europe rages at Trump’s travel banHow some countries have slowed the virus downGet the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverageBasketball, baseball and hockey seasons suspended. Theaters and museums shuttered. Concerts scrapped. A sober-toned speech from the Oval Office. Travel plans upended. One plunge after another on Wall Street. Well-known athletes, preachers and politicians infected — and even Tom Hanks.The coronavirus outbreak is feeling a lot less distant today for many Americans, even if they live far from any reported case. That was especially true for those on a JetBlue flight to West Palm Beach, Fla., from New York after one passenger learned in midflight that his coronavirus test had come back positive.The outbreak even seemed to be circling closer to President Trump. A senior Brazilian official who visited Mar-a-Lago and was in proximity to Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence has tested positive. A White House spokeswoman said Thursday that the president and vice president would not be tested.The Brazilian official was part of a delegation led by President Jair Bolsonaro, who is waiting to hear if he has the virus, too. Two Republican senators who met with Mr. Bolsonaro or were at Mar-a-Lago — Rick Scott of Florida and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina — put themselves in isolation.Mr. Trump’s 30-day travel ban on people from most of Europe didn’t go down well on the Continent. Stocks tanked, travelers scrambled and tempers rose. The European Union complained that it had not been consulted or even warned, and said that tackling the pandemic “requires cooperation rather than unilateral action.”The ban doesn’t apply to Americans returning from Europe, but even so, many raced to book flights home before it kicks in Friday at midnight. By dawn there were chaotic scenes at major airports, and European leaders were firing back at Mr. Trump’s claim that they were to blame for letting the virus spread.Christian Drosten, a top German virologist, called the ban “pointless” and the blame misguided. “It is clear that testing in the U.S. started too late, and as a result, they don’t even know how many cases they have,” Dr. Drosten said. “So he can easily point the finger.”About 22,000 cases of infection and 943 deaths have been reported across Europe, according to the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control. That includes Britain and Ireland, which are exempt from the travel ban.Italy, the hardest-hit European country, is in almost total lockdown; practically everything is closed except grocery stores, pharmacies, banks and hospitals. But our Rome-based correspondent Jason Horowitz writes that the lockdown did not come in time to spare one of Europe’s best health care systems from being strained to breaking.Swamped hospitals are filling hallways with beds or setting up inflatable shelters to serve as wards. There are reports of some patients with little chance of survival being left to their fate so that others with more hope can be treated. A photo of a hospital nurse who collapsed from exhaustion, her mask still on, has become a symbol of an overwhelmed system.Three countries with large numbers of infections — China, South Korea and Italy — have taken very different approaches to the virus. On today’s episode of “The Daily,” Donald G. McNeil Jr., our infectious disease reporter, explains which have worked and which have fallen short.What they did: People who think they might be sick report to a fever clinic, instead of a hospital or doctor’s office. They get a variety of tests, including a CT scan, and are kept in isolation to await the results.“There is no home quarantine in China,” Donald said. That’s because 75 to 80 percent of all cases were in family clusters.How it’s going: New cases have fallen from 3,500 a day in late January to just 24 on Tuesday.What they did: Early cases centered around one very large church, where it “spread like wildfire,” Donald said. So the country is tracing and quarantining the contacts of more than 200,000 church members. As in China, people with symptoms go to isolation centers instead of staying home.And to find infected people before they become ill, the country is testing on a huge scale — more than 10,000 a day. That’s about how many the U.S. has tested in total.How it’s going: New infections have been slowing, and just 66 deaths have been reported out of 7,800 total cases.What they did: In the beginning, officials refused to take drastic steps. “They wanted to keep the clubs open into the evenings,” Donald said. “They didn’t want to play soccer games without fans in the stands. They didn’t want to shut down movement.”The government was also resistant to the idea of social distancing, and wanted to manage mild cases at home instead of in isolation centers.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.How it’s going: About 15,000 reported cases, more than 1,000 deaths, a struggling health care system, and the whole country on lockdown. “They’re in real trouble,” Donald said.The outbreak here is lagging a few weeks behind Italy’s, and the situation has not yet gotten as dire. But Donald said the countries might be on similar paths: Testing in the U.S. has been extremely limited — among the lowest per capita rates in the developed world — and large gatherings are only now being shut down.Aggressive steps are much more difficult in a democracy, Donald acknowledged, but “when the threat is big enough, America can get organized.”“We’re used to enjoying our civil liberties,” he said. “But if what you’re hoping for is life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, you have to preserve life, or the other two just aren’t there.”States are banning large gatherings: California has banned gatherings of 250 people or more; Oregon has imposed a similar ban; and in New York, the governor banned gatherings of more than 500 people, which includes shutting down Broadway shows.In Lebanon, employees at the main hospital treating coronavirus patients went on strike, citing “harsh conditions.” The country has reported 61 cases and 2 deaths.Satellite imagery shows vast burial trenches being dug in Iran soon after its government disclosed the outbreak there, The Washington Post reports.El Salvador, with no reported cases, has barred all foreigners from entering for 30 days.Cuba announced its first three cases: Italian tourists who developed symptoms on the island.Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, is in self-quarantine with his wife, Sophie Gregoire-Trudeau, after she began to show “mild flu-like symptoms” after a trip to London.Should I stop making 401(k) contributions? The short answer: Absolutely not! The fall in the market means that stocks are on sale now, with time and room to grow over the long term.Here are resources for teaching children about the coronavirus, including writing prompts, short documentaries, learning ideas and critical thinking exercises.Can the government force you into quarantine? Yes. The federal government can impose quarantines to prevent the spread of disease into the country or between states. And state and local governments can order you to stay home or in a health facility.Wash your hands, wash your hands, wash your hands. That splash-under-water flick won’t cut it anymore. The rest of the best advice on preventing the virus is still the same: Practice social distancing, stay home if you’re feeling sick, and if you’re going to stock up on supplies, go easy on the toilet paper.U.S. stocks plunged in their biggest daily drop since the 1987 Black Monday crash. The Federal Reserve intervened when it saw “highly unusual disruptions in Treasury financing markets.”There was a glimmer of hope in the negotiations between Speaker Nancy Pelosi and the Trump administration over a bipartisan virus relief package. Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, canceled a one-week recess, and the U.S. Capitol closed to visitors until April.Tom Hanks and his wife, Rita Wilson, tested positive for the coronavirus in Australia, where, unlike in the United States, testing is free and readily available.Is this the biggest coronavirus worry? The U.S. doesn’t have enough ventilators and intensive-care beds to meet a significant surge of new cases, and the health system could become overwhelmed.Suspended seasons, canceled games and tournaments held without fans. Here’s how the coronavirus is disrupting sporting events around the world.A teenager in Britain was sent home from school for selling squirts of hand sanitizer for 50 pence a hit, the BBC reports.The outbreak has given birth to a new word in Japanese — “on-nomi,” or “online drinking” — the Asahi Shimbun reports.We are in our late 60s and mid 70s. Even though we are both in good health, we are concerned. We no longer engage in casual contact at church and other places. On the positive side, one of us is helping set up some folks in our congregation with a link to watch church services streamed live at home, and teaching other folks how to set up online shopping accounts, etc., so they can have food and other goods delivered.— S Nelson, East Central KentuckyLet us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.Sign up here to get the briefing by email.