A List of What’s Been Canceled Because of the Coronavirus
By The New York TimesOne by one, from the world’s premier basketball league and international concerts to sprawling festivals, institutions have faced the same hard question: Is a public gathering worth the risk of spreading the new coronavirus?The answer, again and again, has been “no.”The Tokyo Olympics this week joined dozens of organizations, gatherings and cultural events that have changed their plans in the last few weeks, as the World Health Organization formally declared the coronavirus a pandemic, and the number of people who have been sickened or died has mounted.The Trump administration has recommended closing schools and avoiding groups of more than 10 people as well as discretionary travel, bars, restaurants and food courts. State and local officials have imposed additional restrictions.Some have held out amid the growing number of cancellations. The WWE said WrestleMania was still on, just with no audience. It will be streamed live on April 5.Here’s a brief rundown of some of the larger events around the world that have been modified or canceled.The International Olympic Committee said in a joint statement with the Prime Minister’s Office in Japan that the Olympic Games, which had been scheduled to start in Tokyo in July, would be rescheduled to a date “beyond 2020 but not later than summer 2021.”The N.B.A. suspended its season, shortly after a March 11 game between the Utah Jazz and the Oklahoma City Thunder was halted just before tip-off. A player for the Jazz tested positive for the coronavirus.The Kentucky Derby, the first jewel in horse racing’s Triple Crown, said late Monday that it was breaking with the tradition of holding the race on the first Saturday in May and would hold it on Sept. 5 instead.NASCAR said that it was suspending all racing through May 3.The Indianapolis 500, which is held annually over the Memorial Day weekend and was originally scheduled for May 24, has been rescheduled for Sunday, Aug. 23.Major League Soccer suspended its season for at least 30 days, beginning March 12, less than two weeks after matches began on Feb. 29. The season is scheduled to run through Oct. 4. The National Hockey League also said it would pause its season. Major League Baseball pushed back its season opening by at least two weeks and suspended spring training games.Wimbledon, which was scheduled from June 29 to July 12, will not be held in 2020. The tournament, the oldest tennis Grand Slam event, had previously been canceled only during World War I and World War II.The French Open, set for late May, has been postponed until Sept. 20.The N.C.A.A. canceled the men’s and women’s Division I basketball tournaments, in addition to all remaining winter and spring N.C.A.A. championships. The association’s initial response to the crisis called for tournament games to be played without fans in the arenas.Many international sporting events have been postponed, including Six Nations and Women’s Six Nations rugby matches that had been scheduled for February and March, and the Hong Kong and Singapore Sevens. The Boston Marathon and the Masters golf tournament, two of America’s oldest sporting events, were postponed because of the virus.Others have taken place with major changes, like the Tokyo Marathon, which was restricted to elite runners. Formula One has said that its upcoming Grand Prix in Bahrain will be closed to spectators, while the Chinese Grand Prix, which had been scheduled for April, was postponed.Italy and Iran, which are contending with major outbreaks, have canceled sporting events, and Greece barred spectators for a two-week period. Professional soccer games in Spain and Portugal will also take place in empty stadiums for at least two weeks, officials said on Tuesday. A day earlier, FIFA said it would postpone the Asian qualifiers for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar.The BNP Paribas Open, a major tennis tournament that was scheduled to take place in Indian Wells, Calif., beginning this week, was canceled after local health officials declared a public health emergency in the Coachella Valley because of a locally acquired case of the coronavirus.Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York ordered an end to all gatherings of more than 500 people, with some exceptions, forcing the shutdown of Broadway. The runs of 31 plays and musicals were stopped for at least a month. London’s West End theaters have followed suit.The Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art announced that they would temporarily close. MoMA’s closure would continue at least through March 30; the Met did not announce a target date to reopen.The organizers of the Met Gala announced that the annual benefit at the Metropolitan Museum, which had been scheduled for May 4, had been postponed indefinitely because of the health crisis.The Louvre Museum in Paris said it was closed until further notice. The Cannes Film Festival, scheduled for May, was postponed.The 74th annual Tonys ceremony, scheduled to be held at Radio City Music Hall in New York City on June 7, has been postponed and will be rescheduled at a later date.The Edinburgh International Festival, a showcase for world theater, dance and music that has been held in the Scottish city every year since 1947, has been canceled. So has the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, a scrappier event devoted to comedy and theater. The Edinburgh International, the Edinburgh Art Festival and the Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo, an event involving armed forces bands from around the world, won’t take place this year either. The Eurovision Song Contest — Europe’s longest-running, most popular and perhaps its campiest talent competition — was also canceled.Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte of Italy announced that public gatherings were banned and that people would be allowed to travel only for work or for emergencies. Even church services are prohibited.Ireland’s government canceled all St. Patrick’s Day parades, including Dublin’s. (Boston, which has a robust Irish-American population, also canceled its parade; Manhattan’s was postponed.) Berlin closed state and private theaters, concert halls, opera houses, state-run museums, monuments and libraries. Austria banned indoor gatherings of more than 100 people.The Auschwitz Memorial said on Wednesday that it would be closed until March 25.In New York, the Metropolitan Opera, the New York Philharmonic and Carnegie Hall canceled performances through the end of the month.Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has asked the organizers of sports and cultural events to consider postponing or canceling them. Tokyo’s Nakameguro district canceled its Cherry Blossom Festival. The Japan National Tourism Organization is maintaining a list of attractions and events that have been canceled.Austin, Texas, canceled the 34th annual South by Southwest festival after tech companies, including Apple, Facebook, Twitter and TikTok, withdrew their participation. The sprawling music, tech and film festival was to run from March 13 to 22, with events planned throughout bars and party spaces across the city, and at a convention center. Glastonbury, one of the world’s most prominent music festivals, set this year for June 24-28 in Britain, was canceled.The New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, scheduled for April and May, was postponed until the fall, though organizers did not provide exact dates.The Rolling Stones indefinitely postponed their tour of North America, which was set to begin on May 8.The Tribeca Film Festival, which was scheduled to run from April 15-26, has been postponed. Organizers did not give a new date for the event.In Washington, the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts canceled all public events and performances through the end of March.The Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Fla. — a complex of six separately ticketed parks that have a combined annual attendance of 93 million — will close on March 15 through the end of the month.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Disney has closed the resort before because of hurricane Matthew in 2016, Frances in 2004 and Floyd in 1999.The Disneyland Paris Resort and the Disney Cruise Line, which operates four ships that can carry 13,400 people, said it would close from March 15 through the end of March.For only the fourth time in its 65-year history, the Disneyland resort in Anaheim, Calif., said it would close through at least the end of March.One of the largest rodeos in the world, the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, was shut down a week into the event. The rodeo, which was to run through March 22, features bull and horse riding and an exhibition of cattle, pigs, llamas and other animals, among other activities. It regularly draws tens of thousands of people every day.The Tucson Festival of Books, which was planned for March 14 and 15, was also canceled. The book festival is one of the biggest in the country and usually draws over 100,000 people to Tucson, Ariz. The Los Angeles Times postponed its 25th annual Festival of Books, originally scheduled to take place next month on the University of Southern California campus, until October.The organizers of the giant Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, which takes place in the picturesque desert of Southern California and is seen as a bellwether for the multibillion-dollar touring industry, have postponed the festival until October.The festival will now take place in October. Tickets that were purchased for April will be honored in October.ABC’s “The View” taped the daytime talk show without a studio audience.“The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon” and “Late Night with Seth Meyers” suspended production. The earliest there could be a new episode of either show is on March 30, as both shows will be on hiatus the week of March 23. “The Late Show with Stephen Colbert” on CBS also suspended production, but Mr. Colbert returned to the airwaves on March 17, delivering a monologue from his bathroom.Hollywood has been watching the spread of the virus closely, and expecting a major impact on box office sales. In one of the industry’s first significant responses, the producers of the latest movie in the James Bond franchise, “No Time to Die,” announced they would move its release from April to November. John Krasinski, the director of “A Quiet Place Part II,” said the movie’s release would be postponed. The latest film in the blockbuster “Fast & Furious” series, “F9: The Fast Saga,” was supposed to premiere on May 22, but will now be released in April 2021.And “Saturday Night Live” is also halting production, NBC said in a statement. The network did not give a date for when production would resume.In the first major cancellations of the presidential race because of concerns about the coronavirus, Senator Bernie Sanders and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. called off campaign events in Cleveland in advance of the primaries on March 17. Ohio has three confirmed cases of the virus, and Gov. Mike DeWine has called for limiting public gatherings.Many businesses and professional organizations postponed or canceled conferences, including the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society, which had organized a global health conference scheduled to take place in Orlando, Fla. President Trump had been among the scheduled speakers.Google canceled its I/O developer event near Palo Alto, Calif., which was scheduled for May. The company usually announces new products and developments at the event.E3, one of the video game industry’s biggest conventions that was scheduled for June in Los Angeles, was canceled. Organizers of the convention, where developers showcase their latest creations, said that the cancellation was “the best way to proceed during such an unprecedented global situation.”The New York International Auto Show that was scheduled for April has been postponed. The show is now scheduled to run Aug. 28 to Sept. 6.“We are taking this extraordinary step to help protect our attendees, exhibitors and all participants from the coronavirus,” said Mark Schienberg, president of the Greater New York Automobile Dealers Association, which owns the show.Schools in Italy, Iran, China, South Korea, Japan and elsewhere have been closed because of the outbreak. This week, many American educational institutions announced they would also cancel classes. In one of the most far-reaching decisions, Harvard ordered all undergraduate students to move out of their dormitories by March 15 and said it would conduct all classes online through the spring semester.New York University, the University of Florida, Ohio State University, Columbia University and Princeton University were among the schools that announced they would move to online instruction. Seattle public schools announced on Wednesday that they would close for at least two weeks.