Bangkok Opens Up as Virus Caseloads Drop, and Pretty Pups Benefit
Bangkok is crazy for purebred dogs. Some wear nail polish, and many wear clothes. Our overheated schnauzer needed a trim, and the government opened up pet groomers just in time.By Hannah BeechPhotographs by Amanda MustardBANGKOK — When the coronavirus lockdown in Bangkok eased a bit after six weeks, the first appointment my family made was not for a medical checkup or a walk in a park.Instead, we called the pet salon. Caper, our 9-month-old miniature schnauzer, was desperate for a trim.Thailand remains under a state of emergency through at least the end of May, with almost no international flights in or out. But because of the country’s low confirmed caseload of virus infections — about 3,000 cases and 56 deaths, as of Saturday — certain businesses have been allowed to reopen under strict social distancing and hygiene limits.Businesses given the green light are most restaurants, cafes and street-food vendors; markets; dining-in sections of supermarkets and grocery stores; public parks and outdoor sporting complexes; hair salons and barbershops — and pet grooming salons.Yes, that’s right, pet salons are important enough an industry in Thailand to merit their own category, alongside parks and restaurants.Bangkok is crazy for purebred dogs. All over town, you will see Labradors and Weimaraners, Pomeranians and pugs. There are too many Yorkshire terriers. Some wear nail polish, and many wear clothes.Thailand’s king favors poodles, in white. Occasionally, they gallivant through royal abodes in black booties. A previous pooch of his wore a uniform with epaulets but that’s because he held the military rank of air chief marshal, according to a leaked American diplomatic cable.A puppy hair cut might seem frivolous but let me explain. It is the hot season in Thailand, when temperatures hover around 100 degrees. The schnauzer’s natural coat, thick and woolly, is more suited to the Black Forest of its native Germany than a tropical metropolis like Bangkok.Caper was hot. We were hot just looking at Caper, whose coffee-brown eyes were disappearing underneath prodigious, professorial eyebrows.All her panting was, frankly, a little unnerving. I worried what people might hear during phone interviews.I tried trimming her, as my husband held her down, a project that went as well as you might expect when two journalists with zero expertise attempt animal topiary. (In my defense, I am left-handed and was using right-handed scissors.)When I heard that the lockdown might be relaxed a bit, my husband quickly called the pet salon. We secured an appointment for 4 p.m. on Sunday, the very day certain businesses were allowed to resume operations under certain conditions. There are no walk-ins; the premises have to be cleaned every couple hours; and workers have to wear appropriate personal protective equipment.Our Sunday was much like the previous 42 days under lockdown. We played board games with our children, and we ate no-knead bread. But at 3:50 p.m., my husband grabbed his mask and a very fuzzy dog. He hopped on the back of a motorcycle taxi, Caper’s beard billowing in the breeze.When they arrived at the Tender Loving Care Pet Wellness Center, there was a cancan line of chow chows awaiting their treatments. A bulldog idled, too.An employee was hosing off the driveway. My husband had his temperature taken and filled in a health form. Caper, after six weeks spent only with my family, was overwhelmed by the bustle and promptly urinated on the floor.The salon has a swimming pool, to blunt the heat for the wintry breeds that are unaccountably popular in Bangkok — all those huskies and malamutes and Samoyeds. A paddle in the pool, with a life jacket and personalized trainer, followed by a bath and blow-dry, costs $10 for a toy breed and $25 for a heftier one.A grooming session with hypoallergenic shampoo, brushing, blow-dry, cut and nail clipping goes for just over $20 for a Caper-sized dog. Cat grooming, inexplicably, costs less.The groomer went to the Starwood Arts of Dog Grooming School, which one of the salon’s owners, Patcharapan Ngamukos, assured me was the best in the country.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The price of $20 may not seem like a lot by the standards of New York or London, but it is roughly equivalent to the average daily wage in Thailand, which has one of the widest wealth gaps among the world’s major economies.In the two weeks after the Thai government unveiled a coronavirus relief fund for workers in the informal economy, more than 27 million people in a country of about 70 million applied online. Tourism, an economic mainstay, has been hit hard. Most unemployed workers have not received their relief checks.The Soi Dog Foundation, which tries to find homes for the large number of strays roaming Thai streets, has begun an emergency appeal because the international flight ban has disrupted overseas adoptions.With unemployment rates climbing and more mass layoffs expected, some Thais are shedding their purebred pets, with their expensive haircuts and taste for imported kibble. There are also worries — unfounded, scientists say — that pets can transmit the coronavirus to their owners.Since reopening, though, the salon has been booked solid. There are Shih-Tzus who can barely see because their bangs have grown too long and Dobermans who need their teeth brushed.“We’re really busy because a lot happened to the dogs during those six weeks,” Ms. Patcharapan said.“Well, I mean, not a lot happened,” she added. “But their hair grew way too long.”