Israeli Election Rivals Seek Deadline Extension to Form Unity Government
By Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — With the negotiations over a unity government in Israel at a critical juncture, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his chief rival, Benny Gantz, asked the country’s president early on Tuesday to extend the deadline to form a joint coalition to midnight Wednesday.The two sides, hampered by discord and acrimony in their discussions over a power-sharing deal, had been unable to reach an agreement before a deadline passed at midnight Monday.The president, Reuven Rivlin, acceded to the extension request on the understanding that the two sides were close to an agreement, according to a statement early Tuesday morning from his office.If the two sides cannot resolve their differences by Wednesday night, Mr. Rivlin is expected to refer the task of forming a government to Parliament, a step that would start a countdown toward a possible new election, Israel’s fourth in little over a year.The Parliament would then have 21 days to come up with a candidate for prime minister endorsed by 61 members of the 120-member assembly. Failing that, Parliament would automatically disperse, sending Israelis back to the ballot box.In separate televised statements on Monday night, just hours before the original deadline, both Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Gantz expressed their desire for a unity government, citing the emergency created by the coronavirus pandemic, but neither explained what was standing in the way of an agreement.“We will keep making every effort to achieve the unity that the country so needs these days,” Mr. Netanyahu said in a speech that began with a lengthy explanation of the latest coronavirus restrictions. Soon after, he called on Mr. Gantz to negotiate.“Benny, I’m waiting for you in the prime minister’s residence in Jerusalem,” Mr. Netanyahu wrote on Twitter. “Let’s meet and sign even tonight on forming a national emergency government that will save lives and work for the citizens of Israel.”In an impassioned speech half an hour later, Mr. Gantz, who was unable to form his own coalition despite having received more endorsements from lawmakers than Mr. Netanyahu did after the March election, exhorted the prime minister to come to an agreement.“Netanyahu, we have arrived at the moment of truth,” he said. “The citizens of Israel expect us — both of us — to make difficult decisions.”Last month’s election, the third inconclusive ballot since April 2019, left Mr. Gantz’s centrist Blue and White party and its allies with a slight numeric advantage in Parliament but, like Mr. Netanyahu’s conservative Likud party, it was unable to muster a majority coalition.The only apparent way out of the deadlock was to join forces.Citing the good of the country, Mr. Gantz reneged last month on repeated campaign promises not to sit in a government under Mr. Netanyahu, who faces trial on corruption charges. Mr. Gantz agreed in principle to enter a unity government in which Mr. Netanyahu would remain prime minister for the first 18 months and Mr. Gantz would take over for the following 18 months.Mr. Gantz’s party immediately broke up as a result of his political reversal, diminishing his political leverage as many former supporters accused him of betraying their trust.In his speech on Monday, Mr. Gantz defended his about-face, saying he had put the country’s interests ahead of his own and adding, “I’m at peace with myself and I’m at peace with my decision.”“The state of emergency that has been forced upon Israel and the entire world does not allow leaders to close their eyes and ears and remain concerned only with their own egos,” he said.But the talks, for what was meant to be a national emergency government to combat the coronavirus crisis, became bogged down in political and legal details.Many analysts were left questioning if Mr. Netanyahu, Israel’s longest serving prime minister and a renowned political survivor, really wanted an agreement or if his plan was just to neutralize Mr. Gantz and aim for a fourth election all along.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Even if the task of forming a government passes to Parliament, Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Gantz would still have three weeks to negotiate a power-sharing deal.Alternatively, with the opposition in pieces, Mr. Netanyahu, who already has the endorsement of 59 lawmakers, could try to persuade a couple of defectors to cross the lines and form a narrow government.If neither of these things happen, a fourth election would become inevitable.So far, the unity talks have been rancorous, with Mr. Netanyahu seemingly focused on ensuring he can remain in office despite his legal troubles. Unity talks broke down last week as Mr. Netanyahu tried to change the procedures for appointing Supreme Court judges, according to Blue and White officials.After talks resumed again a few days later, Mr. Netanyahu, analysts said, was mostly concerned with finding a way to override any future Supreme Court decision barring a candidate charged with crimes — like himself — from forming a government.Mr. Gantz, for his part, has been trying to salvage his reputation by refusing to give way on Likud demands that he considers harmful to democracy and the rule of law.But even if a unity government is formed, political analysts were skeptical that Mr. Gantz would get a turn as prime minister after Mr. Netanyahu, or that the government would even last that long.