Boris Johnson Aide Attended Secretive U.K. Coronavirus Panel
By Mark LandlerLONDON — The British government came under heightened pressure to disclose details about a secretive scientific advisory group after a report on Friday that a top political aide to Prime Minister Boris Johnson had taken part in the group’s meetings on the coronavirus pandemic.The adviser, Dominic Cummings, as well as a data scientist with close ties to Mr. Cummings, attended a meeting of the Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies, or SAGE, on March 23, the day Mr. Johnson ordered a lockdown to try to curb the spread of the virus, according to a report in The Guardian.Mr. Cummings was a major strategist in the 2016 campaign for Brexit and is viewed as one of the masterminds of Mr. Johnson’s landslide election victory in December, when he used the slogan “Get Brexit Done.” The data scientist, Ben Warner, worked with Mr. Cummings on the Brexit “Vote Leave” campaign.The government has refused to disclose the members of SAGE or publish the minutes of its meetings, citing the security and independence of the scientists. That has raised questions about its role, particularly after the government abruptly shifted its response to the virus in late March from a more relaxed approach to a lockdown that put Britain in line with other European countries.The latest report added fuel to the fire, with the opposition saying it tarnished the government’s credibility.“Dominic Cummings has no place on the government’s scientific advisory group on the coronavirus,” Jonathan Ashworth, the Labour Party’s shadow health and social care secretary, said in a statement. “He is a political adviser, not a medical or scientific expert.”Even Conservative lawmakers expressed misgivings.“We should publish the membership of SAGE,” David Davis, a former cabinet minister, said on Twitter, adding that the government should “remove any nonscientist members” and “publish their advice in full.”Mr. Davis, who was responsible for Brexit negotiations under Mr. Johnson’s predecessor, Theresa May, has a history of hostile exchanges with Mr. Cummings.The government denied that Mr. Cummings or Mr. Warner were members of the group. In a statement, it said they had merely listened in to its deliberations and occasionally asked questions or offered help in navigating the bureaucracy.“The scientists who contribute to SAGE are among the most eminent in their fields,” the statement said. “It is completely wrong to imply their advice is in any way not impartial.”SAGE is composed of experts in fields including epidemiology and behavioral science. They come from labs at Oxford, Cambridge, Imperial College London, and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.The Guardian published what it said was a list of members. Some are well known, like Neil Ferguson, an epidemiologist at Imperial College, who published a report in March that projected an uncontrolled spread of the virus could kill 500,000 people in Britain. That report helped trigger the shift in the government’s response and was influential in shaping the White House’s thinking, as well.Another member, Jeremy Farrar, an infectious disease expert and the director of the Wellcome Trust, recently told the BBC, “The U.K. is likely to be certainly one of the worst, if not the worst, affected countries in Europe.”Updated May 20, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Cummings has written about his desire to bring more people with backgrounds in math and science into the government. Working in 10 Downing Street, he has continued to exert enormous influence over Mr. Johnson, though like the prime minister, he was himself sidelined by the virus.Mr. Cummings’s wife, Mary Wakefield, wrote in The Spectator that he was bedridden for 10 days with “high fever and spasms that made the muscles lump and twitch in his legs.”“He could breathe, but only in a limited, shallow way,” she said.