An American in a Locked Down Chinese Town: ‘Everyone Here Is So Bored’
Policed by his neighbors and inundated with misinformation, Bob Huang watches a small community grow increasingly isolated.By Alexandra StevensonWeeks before the coronavirus became a national health crisis in China, authorities threatened a doctor, Li Wenliang, who warned about early cases. State media reported that Dr. Li was illegally spreading rumors.That was a red flag for Bob Huang.“People here tend to believe the government. Not me,” said Mr. Huang, who is 50 years old and lives with his mother, Zhang Wanrong, and her caretaker in Zhicheng, a town of 300,000 in northern Zhejiang Province. “I’ve watched too many episodes of ‘The X-Files.’”Mr. Huang is not like other people in Zhicheng. He is a Chinese-born American and, as he put it, he doesn’t think like his neighbors. As Zhicheng barricades itself from the outside world, he has watched with the bewilderment of an outsider, even if he shares his neighbors’ dry sense of humor about the situation.Human interaction can be tough to find in a town barricaded from the rest of the world. Mr. Huang takes what he can get.It begins with the volunteer guards outside his residential complex when he leaves home to buy groceries. Many wear red jackets with “volunteer” emblazoned across the back. Some are his neighbors. One of them is his dentist.Sometimes this motley group of guards calls in reinforcements — cops in protective gear with Tasers. Mr. Huang refers to them as the “SWAT team.”They don’t have much useful information, Mr. Huang said, but they have plenty of conspiracy theories.One day, a guard paused to look at Mr. Huang’s passport, then looked up and scowled. “This pandemic is definitely caused by you American imperialists!” the guard told Mr. Huang. The virus was obviously a new biochemical weapon, the guard reasoned. He was only partly joking.“He doesn’t like the U.S. or Americans,” Mr. Huang said.The next day, the guard apologized. His facts were wrong. Greedy and reckless Chinese scientists at a high security biochemical lab in Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, were behind the spread, the guard said. They had sold an infected test monkey to the live market where authorities believe the virus spread. As far as Mr. Huang could tell, the guard believed the story.Another guard told Mr. Huang that he saw a memo from the same lab, which had been posted online. The Wuhan lab had a cure, too, the second guard argued, and scientists planned to sell it and make boatloads of money.(Scientists from around the world have broadly rejected the idea that the coronavirus was made by humans.)Mr. Huang has to pass through several more makeshift checkpoints just to get to the market. At each checkpoint, Mr. Huang must write down his personal information and have his temperature checked. He goes through the same routine when he returns home. A 10 minute journey now takes three times as long.The guards might be ad hoc, but they take their jobs seriously. One day a drunk neighbor returned to Mr. Huang’s complex and refused to explain why he had been gone for more than a day. The guards called in eight cops to subdue the man.“Yeah, I was there rubbernecking,” Mr. Huang said. “But I wasn’t allowed to take pictures. Sad.”Sure, the checkpoints and lockdown might seem extreme, Mr. Huang said, but they aren’t infallible. He has a friend in a nearby town who sneaks out to go swimming in the river every day.One day last week, a man from a neighboring province walked into town after a four-day trek along smaller roads not subject to road checks. “There are plenty of cracks to be found,” he said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The biggest problem, Mr. Huang said, is the town’s deep combination of listlessness and loneliness. Human interactions are becoming fewer and farther between as local officials change the rules to try to contain the virus. Now, each family can only send one member out to buy food once every two days.“Everyone here is so bored,” Mr. Huang said with a sigh.A graduate of the University of California, Berkeley, Mr. Huang got married in the United States and became a naturalized citizen. When his father died in 2003, he and his wife moved back to China to take care of his mother, choosing Zhicheng as their base.In 2012, his mother was left paralyzed from a brain hemorrhage and a caretaker moved in. Since Mr. Huang’s wife died from colon cancer two years ago, it is now just him, his mother and her caretaker.Mr. Huang would prefer not to be in China right now. He has told foreign friends in cities like Shanghai and Beijing to leave China if they can.“There is something my father told me a long time ago,” said Mr. Huang. His father was a Communist Party member and local official who described the corruption he witnessed. “What he told me was that in China there is no socialism or communism. He called it ‘elite controlled capitalism.’”