Where’s Xi? China’s Leader Commands Coronavirus Fight From Safe Heights
By Chris Buckley and Steven Lee MyersWUHAN, China — President Xi Jinping strode onstage before an adoring audience in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing less than three weeks ago, trumpeting his successes in steering China through a tumultuous year and promising “landmark” progress in 2020.“Every single Chinese person, every member of the Chinese nation, should feel proud to live in this great era,” he declared to applause on the day before the Lunar New Year holiday. “Our progress will not be halted by any storms and tempests.”Mr. Xi made no mention of a dangerous new coronavirus that had already taken tenacious hold in the country. As he spoke, the government was locking down Wuhan, a city of 11 million people, in a frantic attempt to stop the virus spreading from its epicenter.The coronavirus epidemic, which has killed more than 800 people in China as of Sunday and sickened tens of thousands, comes as Mr. Xi has struggled with a host of other challenges: a slowing economy, huge protests in Hong Kong, an election in Taiwan that rebuffed Beijing and a protracted trade war with the United States.transcript[SPEAKING MANDARIN]I’ll say a few things. So it’s a rainy day. Very, very gloomy, rainy day. And it’s a little loud because we have to keep the windows open, because that’s the recommendation in these situations. You have to keep everything ventilated.Two weeks ago, our researcher Elsie and I went down to Wuhan, which is this major city in the center of China that has been the epicenter of the recent coronavirus outbreak. By then, it had been under lockdown for about a week. And we were really curious to see how people were faring and what was going on, especially at the hospitals there. We took the train from Beijing to Wuhan. And we got off, and what we saw was totally crazy. I mean, we’d never seen anything like it. This is a city of 11 million that had come to a complete standstill. It felt like being in a parallel reality.To see those streets completely empty was really striking. It was eerie to hear the silence. And the only time we heard anything was the occasional barking of a dog or an ambulance passing by. We were walking around this hospital and we walked into the courtyard in front of the outpatient department. And that’s where we came upon this very jarring scene. You had 30 or so patients that were all kind of sitting quietly in the courtyard, all hooked up to IV drips that were hanging from tree branches or in their cars.[SPEAKING MANDARIN]We meet this mother and her two children who are all hooked up to IVs. The mother’s name is Yang Ling.[SPEAKING MANDARIN]They tell me that they are actually a family of six. There’s Yang Ling. There is her husband, her husband’s parents and then their son and their daughter. And they have all been staying together. And she tells us that their grandmother got sick first and one by one, each of them has gotten infected by the coronavirus. And now, her husband is the only one that doesn’t have coronavirus.[SPEAKING MANDARIN]And then they tell me that just one week after the grandmother started showing symptoms, their grandfather died.[SPEAKING MANDARIN]She tells us that after the grandfather dies, the funeral home comes to take the body away —[SPEAKING MANDARIN]— and he is cremated immediately. And she says that —[SPEAKING MANDARIN]— he was taken away just like a dead dog or a dead pig.[SPEAKING MANDARIN]As she’s talking, her voice is starting to carry across the courtyard outside this hospital. And other people are starting to listen in and crowd around us, and she’s starting to get more and more upset. She was so palpably angry that at one point —[SPEAKING MANDARIN]— the mother was waving her arms around in frustration and almost ripped the IV needle out of her hand.[SPEAKING MANDARIN]I’ve been covering China for seven years. And I’ve heard people express frustrations with the government before, but really only in private. This was one of the few times that I’ve heard such raw anger toward the government publicly.[SPEAKING MANDARIN]And she basically says, is this really my country or is this some kind of [EXPLETIVE] up country — a country that doesn’t take care of anything?[SPEAKING MANDARIN].And then she says, what kind of government is this? And after hearing that, that made me think that something was happening that was bigger than just an outbreak of a virus.From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today: Inside China, what began as a story of fear over the coronavirus has now become the story of fury over the government’s handling of the crisis.Beijing correspondent Amy Qin on what she saw in Wuhan. It’s Thursday, February 13.Amy, what is it about this moment that you think is making people like the Zhang family feel free to speak out about their anger and to pretty explicitly criticize the Chinese government?So for the Zhang family, this is for them a matter of life or death. And it was a common feeling I heard throughout the city. But there’s another added frustration boiling across the rest of the country about how the government is handling this crisis. And for them, it’s really been captured in the story of this doctor named Dr. Li Wenliang.And who is this doctor?So Li Wenliang is an eye doctor at a hospital in Wuhan. And he had heard about this virus back in December that was going around the hospitals in the city. And so he went on WeChat, which is this big social messaging platform, and sent in a private messaging group with some of his med school classmates a text message basically warning them to protect themselves. And a few days later after he sent that message, he was actually called in by the police in Wuhan. They brought him into the police station and they made him sign a statement saying that he was spreading false and illegal information — basically, that he was spreading rumors.Authorities say it is untrue and eight people were detained for spreading fake news online and no medical staff had been infected.But of course, it wasn’t a rumor.Chinese health authorities are still working to identify the virus behind a pneumonia outbreak in the central city of Wuhan.By the time Dr. Li was brought into the police station, 41 people had the coronavirus. And from there, it just spread.A SARS-like virus, which has infected hundreds in China, has now reached the United States.Now China has announced the first death from an outbreak of pneumonia caused by an unidentified virus.121 people are under medical observation in Wuhan. Rumors on social media alleged that the outbreak in Wuhan could be linked to SARS.The World Health Organization says it’s a new type of coronavirus.And Amy, at this point, what is happening to Dr. Li?So after Dr. Li gets taken into the police station and forced to sign this statement, he was actually treating a patient for glaucoma. And she wasn’t showing any symptoms at the time, but he ended up contracting the virus from her.Wow.And from his sickbed, he starts to speak out again.In a matter of days, Dr. Li Wenliang went from treating patients to becoming one.He gives some interviews to Chinese media and he starts to become this public figure.Struggling to communicate, Li spoke with CNN briefly by phone. You can hear the hospital machines pulsing in the background.He becomes known as a whistleblower —Whistleblowers silenced by police. Calls for Li and the others to be vindicated grew online.— that the government didn’t act fast enough on information that they were given, and that they had missed this critical window of opportunity to get the outbreak under control.China’s Supreme Court even weighed in, adding quote, “It might have been a fortunate thing if the public had listened to this rumor at the time.” But for many —So he’s becoming a kind of spokesperson for a lot of frustrations.Exactly.[INAUDIBLE] [COUGHING]And so at this point, it just feels like there is no light at the end of the tunnel.Now, the death toll in the outbreak of a new coronavirus in China has jumped to 17.Hundreds of people have been diagnosed with a deadly virus known as the 2019 novel coronavirus.Overall, there are now more than 31,500 confirmed cases worldwide.More and more people are getting sick. We’re seeing the numbers just surge every day —600 deaths.— people who are confirmed cases of the coronavirus, people who are dying of the coronavirus.Has jumped to more than 700.Everything felt so uncertain.Officials are imposing restrictions on travel out of Wuhan, China.And 13 cities in lockdown this morning.Near-empty shelves line supermarkets.A need for masks and protective suits.China’s health minister, Ma Xiaowei, has said that he expects infections to continue to rise. And of course, that has everyone here in the country even more nervous.The citizens are actually freaking out.China right now is being massively rocked by anger.And the State Department has said it is chartering a flight to evacuate Americans out of Wuhan. Justin, though, will not be on that —So foreign governments started pulling their citizens out of Wuhan, and that’s when I got the call.So it was late last week, and I had been on the phone all day with my editors. And I get a final call saying you need to go to the airport. There was one flight left that was being arranged by the U.S. State Department to go back to the U.S., so I start scrambling. I leave all my masks, my disinfectant wipes, my hazmat suit, my gloves with my colleagues. And then it’s about a 40-minute drive to the airport.O.K. So I am at the airport in Wuhan now. And it’s been a crazy, hectic day. I think that the next few weeks in quarantine on a military base will bring its own interesting moments.And what is the scene at the airport?The scene at the airport was a little bit frenzied. I mean, at this point, these are really some of the last flights out for these countries who are evacuating their citizens, so it wasn’t just the Americans. There were also the Canadians, the Japanese. And we didn’t even know at that point where they were taking us to. So I’m in the airport lobby and I’m waiting for my flight. And then my phone starts to buzz, and I’m seeing all these messages come through. And I look at them, and then I see that Dr. Li has just died.And I could sense that this was going to be a big moment, because I had started overhearing people talking about it in the airport terminal. But then I just had to leave. I had to get on the flight.We’ll be right back.So Amy, Dr. Li has died from the very virus that he alerted the government to, and you’re on a plane back to the U.S. from Wuhan. So what happens once you land?So once I land, I find that I am at the Miramar Marine base in San Diego, California. I’m carted off to quarantine, and then I turn on my phone and I start going through my messages. And I see this huge upswelling of outrage over Dr. Li’s death. People from every stripe of the political or social spectrum in China — so you have people who are business people, who are blue-collar workers, artists, lawyers — they’re all posting about Dr. Li’s death. And I’ve never seen people come together like this before — and people were so upset about his death.And what are they saying?A lot of people were posting candle emojis and other kinds of remembrances for Dr. Li. They were posting photos of him. He had taken a selfie of himself wearing a surgical mask and someone had recreated that image to replace the surgical mask with barbed wire to kind of indicate that he had been muzzled. Some people were posting the anthem from “Les Mis,” “Do you hear the people sing? Singing a song of angry men?”Wow.We actually saw the hashtag “I want freedom of speech” trending for five hours, which of course, it was quickly censored. And we saw petitions going up by Chinese academics calling for freedom of speech. And we even saw a local government social media account posting a portrait of Dr. Li, along with the lines, “Heroes don’t fall from the sky. They’re just ordinary people who step forward.”Wow.So the reaction is really remarkable. I mean, even the hospital where Dr. Li died posted an official notice of his death. And that had three million reactions and 300,000 comments. And so it was so clear that this was something that had really tapped into the frustration that was happening.And what do you make of those reactions? Because it feels like it no longer is really just about this virus and the way that it was handled?Yeah so at this point, it is clear that this is becoming so much bigger than just the virus. This is really about the government and this social contract that the people have had with the government, where they agree to keep silent as long as the government provides for their prosperity and health. It operates under this principle of stability at all costs.Right. And in their effort to create stability, in fact, they did the opposite.Yeah. I mean, I think that there’s this realization definitely that there is something wrong with the system. And I don’t think that it means that people are going out in the streets and calling for a revolution. But the fact that people are calling for freedom of speech, I mean, that’s really what this brought out. People in China are already used to a pretty high level of censorship, but when it comes to censoring a warning about public health, that goes too far. And the reaction is so overwhelming that the government quickly realizes that they need to do something. And that’s when we see China’s leader Xi Jinping come forward out of the shadows and try to take control of the situation[SPEAKING CHINESE] [LAUGHTER]He comes out and makes an appearance in Beijing.[SPEAKING CHINESE]He visits a community center and a hospital. He gets his temperature taken. He talks with local residents.[SPEAKING CHINESE]And he does a video conference with doctors in Wuhan.[SPEAKING CHINESE] [APPLAUSE]So by this point, the government has sent the nation’s top anti-corruption agency to go down to Wuhan and investigate Dr. Li’s death. And state media is calling Dr. Li a hero.This feels like a real shift for a government that originally reprimanded Dr. Li and is now sending a team to investigate why he was muzzled. It feels like a concession.It is. But at the same time, we have to remember that this is also part of the party’s ethos, which is to always try to control the narrative. And for them, the path of least resistance in this situation is to hold Dr. Li up as a hero, but also to do it in a way that coheres with the party narrative.Huh.Erasing the parts that might challenge their legitimacy or authority, which is the fact that he was punished by the government for trying to call attention to the fact that there was this virus going around.Do you think that the people in China view the government’s response as an attempt to protect them from the virus or to protect the government from the story of a situation that’s out of control?Both. People really believe that the government wants to get this epidemic under control. But at the same time, they know that the government is only going to do this in a way that does not threaten its own hold on power. And that means taking control of the narrative — sending in their own journalists to make sure that only the positive aspects of what they’re doing is being highlighted, and that people who are slipping through the cracks or all the failures of the policy are not being highlighted.Amy, I’m curious. Have you been able to speak to the Zhang family since you evacuated, since you took that flight from Wuhan to California?We have. The last time we checked in with them, their situation had changed. The mother and the daughter were both infected with the coronavirus and have finally been able to get into one of the makeshift quarantine centers set up by the government. Bella, the daughter, sent us a video of the center, and it just shows a huge exhibition center with beds crowded tightly together and all these sick patients in these beds.Meanwhile, Bella’s brother and their grandmother are still at home back in the family apartment sick and unable to get into a hospital. The grandmother is in very serious condition. She can barely get out of bed. And they’re also still living with their father, who is the only family member who hasn’t gotten infected so fae. Though they all think that it will be a matter of time.So basically, half the family is being cared for and the other half have been kind of abandoned.Right. And remember, their grandfather had died in their family apartment and was taken to be cremated immediately. And they still don’t even know where his ashes are.Is the reality that another death in the family could happen something that they are preparing for?Yes, they’ve been planning for it. They told us that when the grandmother dies, they’re not going to let her go to the crematorium. But actually, the mother said she’s going to drag her body to the local neighborhood committee and just put it there on the front steps to show them how their inaction has devastated their entire family.Do you know whether the family knows about Dr. Li’s death, or if they were able to watch that video of Xi Jinping in public addressing the situation?I think if they’ve seen, it’s barely registered. They are so consumed with just trying to survive right now, like so many other people in Wuhan, that they’re just putting their heads down trying to move forward.Amy, thank you very much.Thanks, Michael.On Thursday, nearly 15,000 new cases of coronavirus were added to the tally of infected people in the Chinese province where Wuhan is located — the largest one-day increase of the epidemic so far. That brings the total number of cases to more than 48,000. At the same time, 242 new deaths were also reported, bringing the total death toll in the province to 1,310. We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today. For the second day in a row, President Trump intervened in the prosecution of his longtime friend and adviser, Roger Stone, this time by attacking the judge in the case. On Tuesday, at the president’s urging, the Department of Justice recommended a more lenient prison sentence for Stone, who was convicted of obstructing a congressional investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 election. That move prompted four federal prosecutors to leave the case in protest. On Wednesday, Trump claimed without evidence in a tweet that the judge who will sentence Stone is biased against the president in what Democratic lawmakers said was a clear attempt to intimidate the judge before she sentences Stone.The president ran against the swamp in Washington, a place where the game is rigged by the powerful to benefit them personally. I ask my fellow Americans, what is more swampy, what is more fetid, what is more stinking than the most powerful person in the country literally changing the rules to benefit a crony guilty of breaking the law?In response, Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer called for an investigation into Trump’s conduct.As a result, I have formally requested that the inspector general of the Justice Department investigate this matter immediately.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.Now, Mr. Xi faces an accelerating health crisis that is also a political one: a profound test of the authoritarian system he has built around himself over the past seven years. As the Chinese government struggles to contain the virus amid rising public discontent with its performance, the changes that Mr. Xi has ushered in could make it difficult for him to escape blame.“It’s a big shock to the legitimacy of the ruling party. I think it could be only second to the June 4 incident of 1989. It’s that big,” said Rong Jian, a writer about politics in Beijing, referring to the armed crackdown on Tiananmen Square protesters that year.“There’s no doubt about his control over power," he added, “but the manner of control and its consequences have hurt his legitimacy and reputation.”Mr. Xi himself has recognized what is at stake, calling the outbreak “a major test of China’s system and capacity for governance.”Yet as China’s battle with the coronavirus intensified, Mr. Xi put the country’s No. 2 leader, Li Keqiang, in charge of a leadership group handling the emergency, effectively turning him into the public face of the government’s response. It was Mr. Li who traveled to Wuhan to visit doctors.Mr. Xi, by contrast, receded from public view for several days. That was not without precedent, though it stood out in this crisis, after previous Chinese leaders had used times of disaster to try to show a more common touch. State television and newspapers almost always lead with fawning coverage of Mr. Xi’s every move.That retreat from the spotlight, some analysts said, signaled an effort by Mr. Xi to insulate himself from a campaign that may falter and draw public ire. Yet Mr. Xi has consolidated power, sidelining or eliminating rivals, so there are few people left to blame when something goes wrong.“Politically, I think he is discovering that having total dictatorial power has a downside, which is that when things go wrong or have a high risk of going wrong, then you also have to bear all the responsibility,” said Victor Shih, an associate professor at the University of California San Diego who studies Chinese politics.Much of the country’s population has been told to stay at home, factories remain closed and airlines have cut service. Experts warn that the coronavirus could slam the economy if not swiftly contained.The government is also having trouble controlling the narrative. Mr. Xi now faces unusually sharp public discontent that even China’s rigorous censorship apparatus has been unable to stifle entirely.The death of an ophthalmologist in Wuhan, Dr. Li Wenliang, who was censured for warning his medical school classmates of the spread of a dangerous new disease in December, has unleashed a torrent of pent-up public grief and rage over the government’s handling of the crisis. Chinese academics have launched at least two petitions in the wake of Dr. Li’s death, each calling for freedom of speech.State media still portray Mr. Xi as ultimately in control, and there’s no sign that he faces a serious challenge from within the party leadership. The crisis, though, has already tainted China’s image as an emerging superpower — efficient, stable and strong — that could eventually rival the United States.How much the crisis might erode Mr. Xi’s political standing remains to be seen, but it could weaken his position in the longer run as he prepares to take a likely third term as Communist Party general secretary in 2022.In 2018, Mr. Xi won approval to remove the constitutional limits on his term as the country’s president, making his plan for another five-year term seem all but certain.If Mr. Xi comes out of this crisis politically insecure, the consequences are unpredictable. He may become more open to compromise within the party elite. Or he may double down on the imperious ways that have made him China’s most powerful leader in generations.“Xi’s grip on power is not light,” said Jude Blanchette, the Freeman Chair in China Studies at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.“While the ham-fisted response to this crisis undoubtedly adds a further blemish to Xi’s tenure in office,” Mr. Blanchette added, “the logistics of organizing a leadership challenge against him remain formidable.”In recent days, despite a dearth of public appearances, state media have portrayed Mr. Xi as a tireless commander in chief. This week they began calling the government’s fight against the virus the “people’s war,” a phrase used in the official readout of Mr. Xi’s telephone call with President Trump on Friday.There are increasing signs that the propaganda this time is proving less than persuasive.The Lunar New Year reception in Beijing where Mr. Xi spoke became a source of popular anger, a symbol of a government slow to respond to the suffering in Wuhan. Mr. Xi and other leaders appear to have been caught off guard by the ferocity of the epidemic.Senior officials would almost certainly have been informed of the emerging crisis by the time national health authorities told the World Health Organization on Dec. 31, but neither Mr. Xi nor other officials in Beijing informed the public.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Xi’s first acknowledgment of the epidemic came on Jan. 20, when brief instructions were issued under his name. His first public appearance after the lockdown of Wuhan on Jan. 23 came two days later, when he presided over a meeting of the Communist Party’s top body, the Politburo Standing Committee, which was shown at length on Chinese television. “We’re sure to be able to win in this battle,” he proclaimed.Back then, the death toll was 106. As it rose, Mr. Xi allowed other officials to take on more visible roles. Mr. Xi’s only appearances have been meeting foreign visitors in the Great Hall of the People or presiding over Communist Party meetings.On Jan. 28, Mr. Xi met with the executive director of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, and told Dr. Tedros that he “personally directed” the government’s response. Later reports in state media omitted the phrase, saying instead that Mr. Xi’s government was “collectively directing” the response.Since nothing about how Mr. Xi is portrayed in state media happens by accident, the tweak suggested a deliberate effort to emphasize shared responsibility.Mr. Xi did not appear on official broadcasts again for a week — until a highly scripted meeting on Wednesday with the authoritarian leader of Cambodia, Hun Sen.There is little evidence that Mr. Xi has given up power behind the scenes. Mr. Li, the premier in formal charge of the leadership group for the crisis, and other officials have said that they take their orders from Mr. Xi. The group is filled with officials who work closely under Mr. Xi, and its directives emphasize his authority.“The way the epidemic is being handled now from the top just doesn’t fit with the argument that there’s been a clear shift toward more collective, consultative leadership,” said Holly Snape, a British Academy Fellow at the University of Glasgow who studies Chinese politics.The scale of discontent and the potential challenges for Mr. Xi could be measured by repeated references online to the nuclear accident at Chernobyl. Many of them came under the guise of viewer reviews of the popular television mini-series of the same name, which is still available for streaming inside China.“In any era, any country, it’s the same. Cover everything up,” one reviewer wrote.The Soviet Union of 1986, however, was a different country than China in 2020.The Soviet state was foundering when Chernobyl happened, said Sergey Radchenko, a professor of international relations at Cardiff University in Wales who has written extensively on Soviet and Chinese politics.“The Chinese authorities, by contrast, are demonstrating an ability to cope, a willingness to take unprecedented measures — logistical feats that may actually increase the regime’s legitimacy,” he added.Mr. Radchenko compared Mr. Xi’s actions to those of previous leaders in moments of crisis: Mao Zedong later in the Cultural Revolution or Deng Xiaoping after the Tiananmen Square crackdown.“He’s doing what Mao and Deng would have done in similar circumstances: stepping back into the shadows while remaining firmly in charge.”