Is Coronavirus Widening Generational Divides, or Bridging Them?
By Patrick KingsleyBERLIN — When Austria’s Parliament announced severe restrictions on movement on Sunday, two young Austrian roommates rushed to two supermarkets and a pharmacy before the rules came into force.Andreas Bencic and Thomas Christl, both 25, weren’t stocking their own larder. Instead, they posted handmade signs outside each shop, each an offer to help the elderly or the infirm with their shopping during the coronavirus shutdown.“You sit at home, you’re bored, you see the whole world is going nuts,” said Mr. Bencic, a student at the Vienna University of Economics and Business. “We thought it was a nice thing to do, just to protect the older generation.”The early days of the coronavirus shutdown have sometimes been interpreted through the prism of intergenerational tension: The young, seemingly less at risk to the virus, party on as older people retreat into terrifying isolation.In Berlin on Monday morning, 36 hours after the city shut its nightclubs, a group of youngsters spilled noisily into a residential street after an all-night house party, oblivious to older neighbors hurrying past with their shopping.But as Mr. Bencic’s gesture showed, there is a complexity to generational responses to the coronavirus, not least in Europe, where the disease appears to have spread sooner and faster. While some young people have blithely ignored the warnings, others have heeded calls for cross-generational solidarity.Across Germany, schoolchildren and university students from Fridays for Future — a youth-led climate movement that is often framed in generational terms — quickly canceled both their weekly public protests and their planning meetings.For Quang Paasch, a 19-year-old spokesman for the group in Berlin, there was an irony in how governments and communities have responded radically to a coronavirus crisis that disproportionately affects the old — while consistently avoiding similarly radical responses to a climate crisis that disproportionately affects the young.“It’s kind of a generational conflict,” Mr. Paasch added. The climate crisis is a crisis of both the future and “the now,” he said. “The corona crisis is about just now.”But younger activists like Mr. Paasch also found something hopeful in the drastic actions being taken by governments across Europe — because they might normalize the concept of large-scale state intervention.“All the politicians in the last years have said, ‘Oh, it’s not possible to act,’” Mr. Paasch said. “But now we see it is possible.”Across Europe, leaders have enacted policies that in ordinary times would be contemplated only by the most radical of leftists.In Italy, the government has suspended mortgage payments to soften the crisis’s effect on homeowners. In Denmark, the government will subsidize 75 percent of company payrolls, to persuade firms not to fire their staff. In France, the state will delay taxes for stricken companies and guarantee more than $300 billion of corporate debt.And in the United States, Mitt Romney, the Republican senator from Utah, joined left-wing calls to pay every individual a basic income, regardless of whether they were employed.On the environmental front, the crisis has also drastically reduced pollution in northern Italy and China. Data released by the European Space Agency and NASA showed that restrictions on traffic and air travel had significantly slashed pollutants in the skies above Milan — and by as much as 30 percent in Wuhan, the center of the pandemic in China.“In the short term it will be very bad,” said Srecko Horvat, the co-founder of a new Pan-European political party, Democracy in Europe Movement 2025. “But long-term it might create some radical effect — a radical rethink of how our societies work, the necessity of public health care, a necessity of slowness.”Part of this reordering might include greater solidarity between generations, Mr. Horvat hoped, citing gestures of kindness like Mr. Bencic’s and the number of spontaneous phone calls he had received from long-lost friends since the start of the crisis.Social distancing might keep young and old apart physically, but in emotional terms create “an internationale of generations,” said Mr. Horvat, a 37-year-old Croatian philosopher currently marooned in Vienna.“The whole term ‘social distancing’ is wrong,” he said. “It’s physical distancing — but people are becoming closer socially and emotionally and mentally.”In recent decades, the economic interests of older and younger generations diverged, said Keir Milburn, the author of “Generation Left,” a book about generational divides in Western politics.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.But the urgency of the coronavirus crisis might force generations to find a common economic cause, since it has suddenly elevated the social value placed by older generations on the precarious, low-wage work carried out by younger people in supermarkets, cleaning, transport and food delivery.“There’s been a disconnect which has now been remedied,” said Dr. Milburn, a politics lecturer at the University of Leicester in Britain. “As soon as the crisis strikes, you immediately see that the autonomy of someone who is a bit older and wealthier rests on hidden work.”But the aftermath of the 2008 economic crash showed that the political pendulum could also swing in a completely unexpected direction, Dr. Milburn said. Twelve years ago, there was initially considerable political momentum in the West behind the idea of huge state-led economic intervention as a solution to the crisis — but it was soon usurped by support for the reduction of state expenditure and debt.“In November and December 2008,” Dr. Milburn said, “nobody was predicting what would dominate politics around the world was austerity.”There are also fears that restrictions on human movement in force across Europe will eventually numb people to authoritarian actions in a post-pandemic context.