Coronavirus Outbreak Risks Reviving Stigma for China
By Rick GladstoneSARS. Bird flu. And now a new coronavirus.A lot of epidemics seem to come out of China, leading some to point accusing fingers. President Trump’s trade czar, Peter Navarro, for one, once went so far as to describe the country as a “disease incubator,” and that was before the latest outbreak.But those perceptions are outdated.While some of the most serious outbreaks have been traced to Chinese origins, others associated with China may have started elsewhere.Old stereotypes have also contributed to unfounded portrayals of China as a source of contagion, when in fact it has progressed further than many countries in eradicating scourges that can flourish in developing regions.Still, China’s recent history of what are known as zoonotic infections — viruses, bacteria and parasites that spread between animals and humans — has raised questions about public-health practices in the world’s most populous country.And while the Chinese government has strengthened disease detection and monitoring capabilities, its tendency to play down or even cover up mass outbreaks may play a role in their severity and scope.Dr. Jennifer Huang Bouey, an epidemiologist and senior policy researcher at the RAND Corporation, a research organization, said China had become a leader in the study of contagious disease. The flu vaccines provided in the United States, for example, are often traced to research done in China.At the same time, Dr. Bouey said, China remains somewhat of a laboratory itself.“There is quite a fair amount of epidemics originating in China or passing through China,” she said.Here are five basic questions and answers on China and infectious diseases.Two of the devastating flu pandemics of the 20th century — the Asian flu of 1957 and the Hong Kong flu of 1968 — both originated in China and left a trail of about three million deaths worldwide.The 2003 epidemic of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, or SARS, which killed 774 people, nearly all of them in mainland China, was traced to palm civets sold as exotic meat in southern Chinese food markets.The virus behind a deadly 1997 bird flu outbreak that fatally infected at least 18 people in Hong Kong is believed to have originated among fowl raised in southern mainland China — the source of virtually all poultry in the Chinese territory.Last year, nearly half of China’s pigs were wiped out by a virus that causes African swine fever, an incurable disease. While the virus does not sicken humans and did not originate in China, critics say Chinese government policies and mismanagement may have inadvertently helped the epidemic accelerate through the country’s pig population — the world’s largest — and spread elsewhere in Asia.And as of Monday, the new coronavirus traced to a live-animal market in the central Chinese city of Wuhan had killed 908 people and infected more than 40,000 in China and two dozen other countries and territories. The coronavirus, so named because of its spiky halo look under a microscope, may have originated in bats.Many epidemiologists point to some fundamental facts about China: its population of 1.4 billion people, the proximity of urban and rural dwellers, as well as the slaughterhouses and urban markets where animals are freshly butchered. Fourteen of the world’s 50 most populous metropolitan areas are in China.“The Chinese economy, combined with the Chinese population, have experienced so much growth that you are looking at putting large numbers of people in close contact with large numbers of animals in a confined space,” said Sean Beckmann, a disease ecologist and biology professor at Stetson University in DeLand, Fla.Dr. Beckmann called China “the perfect storm” for zoonotic diseases to flourish. “It gives lots of opportunity for these viruses to cross a species boundary,” he said.No.The Ebola virus, for example, which has ravaged parts of central and Western Africa, is named after the Ebola River in what is now the Democratic Republic of Congo, where the virus was discovered. It may have been transmitted by fruit bats.The Marburg virus, which causes a hemorrhagic fever similar to Ebola’s, was also traced to a virus that resides in African fruit bats. It was named after a town in Germany where it was first detected in laboratory workers in 1967.A flu pandemic in 2009, which killed 17,000 people, was traced to a pig farm in central Mexico.And Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, or MERS, has been traced to camels and bats in Saudi Arabia. It is similar to SARS and has killed at least 858 people and sickened nearly 25,000 in 27 countries since it was first reported in 2012.Chinese officials say yes, and point to what they call an overreaction by the United States and other countries to the coronavirus epidemic. Those countries have imposed virtual travel bans to China and evacuated citizens.The Chinese government also has denounced incidents of anti-Chinese hostility linked to the epidemic.“I do not want to see this,” Huang Ping, China’s consul general in New York, said at a news conference last week. “The virus is the enemy, not the Chinese people.”There is, in fact, a long history of China being stigmatized over disease.In the 19th century, a wave of immigration from Asia prompted warnings of a “yellow peril” and a supposed threat to public health.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Echoes of that are still sometimes heard. In late January, a French newspaper ran a Page 1 story headlined “yellow alert” about the “Chinese coronavirus.” It later apologized.There are those who have tried to blame China for some of the biggest public health calamities of all time.Some historians claimed that China was the likely source of the deadliest flu pandemic in history, the 1918 Spanish Flu — a misnomer itself. The effects of that flu were global. It was associated mainly with Spain because Spanish news reports about the disease, unlike those in countries fighting in World War I, were not censored.In fact, the origin of the pandemic remains a mystery. Some research suggests that it may have been a United States military training base in Kansas, Camp Funston.The Chinese Communist Party is most fearful of the sort of chaos that has historically destabilized China. Party officials tend to prioritize stability, even if it means suppressing important information that, critics say, the public needs to know.The latest example of this may be Dr. Li Wenliang, a Wuhan physician who was punished for having warned early in the outbreak about what he saw as SARS-like cases — and who died last week from the infection. And until very recently, the government also declined repeated offers by international disease experts to send teams to China to help battle the outbreak.Many infectious disease experts say they hope the leaders in Beijing learn from Dr. Li’s death.“You want to have doctors who are empowered and encouraged,” said Dr. Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins University. “You want to reward these types of people. In their effort to manage chaos and silence astute doctors, I would argue the government took a shortsighted action and it had a cascading impact.”Some remain skeptical that the central authorities in Beijing will change their behavior.Yanzhong Huang, a senior fellow for global health at the Council on Foreign Relations, said the official tendency to control and suppress remained strong.“This is a pattern,” he said, “essentially, fundamentally the same: cover-up, inaction, then the central government steps in and takes draconian measures. This is like a Greek tragedy.”