Violin Lessons During the Coronavirus Outbreak. A Pupil’s Progress.
When Kevin Tang’s American teacher found out he was stuck at home because of coronavirus, she decided to use music to improve his mood. transcriptSo tune the whole thing. It was pretty good. But only, like, 55 percent — it needed to be way more solid. All the orchestra stuff, OK, and then you go: [violin playing] If you do that bowing, make sure that your dotted 8th note is long enough. Can you have vibrato on all of your notes be exactly the same? [violin playing]By Alex MarshallThirty minutes into the violin lesson, Anthea Kreston knew that something was wrong.Ms. Kreston, an acclaimed American violinist, was at home in Corvallis, Oregon. Her student, Yunhe Tang, a talented 14-year-old who prefers the name Kevin, was at his home in Chengdu, in southwest China. She had been giving Kevin violin lessons via Skype once a week since last August, but today something was different. Kevin seemed lethargic, like he hadn’t practiced, and Kevin always practiced.“He said, ‘Well, I’m not having lessons here, and I’m not going to school,” Ms. Kreston said. “And then he went, ‘Everyone’s sick.’”It did not take long for Ms. Kreston to realize Kevin’s life had been affected by the coronavirus, even though he lived over 700 miles from Wuhan, the city at the center of the outbreak.Chengdu is one of dozens of Chinese cities that are effectively on lockdown because of the virus. Schools are closed for the rest of the month and most businesses are struggling to reopen after being closed for weeks. Sichuan, the province of which Chengdu is the capital, had 436 confirmed cases of the virus as of Wednesday.Kevin’s family remains healthy, but Kevin has mostly been stuck inside. Ms. Kreston said she couldn’t stop thinking about Kevin shut up in the apartment, and decided to try and help take his mind off the virus. The day after the lesson earlier this month, she messaged Kevin and his family and asked if they would like to temporarily step up Kevin’s lessons at no extra cost. As long as he was shut indoors, she wanted to have daily contact with him, and run a kind of violinist’s boot camp during the coronavirus outbreak. The family agreed.Kevin’s challenge would be to learn a new concerto — Lalo’s “Symphonie Espagnole” — in a few weeks, something she said would normally take 100 days. Ms. Kreston would also give him daily technical exercises to practice. She asked Kevin to record two videos a night to show he was doing the work, and send them to her.“When you go out of that door, I want you to have something to show to everybody,” Ms. Kreston recalled telling Kevin. “This is such a gift to you,” — she added, trying to put a positive spin on having more time to practice. “You can come out the strongest player ever,” she added.Kevin was scared when he first heard about the virus, he said in a Skype interview on Wednesday. “I just wanted to wear my mask wherever I go, even when eating,” he said with a laugh. He realized how serious the situation was at the end of January when the family’s Lunar New Year vacation to Chongqing, a city in the middle of China, was canceled. Kevin had been looking forward to playing his violin loudly outside every day. Instead, he had stayed home, watched news reports about the virus, and became nervous. Kevin said the nerves passed quickly. His mother, who works at a hospital in Chengdu in its supplies department, told him as long as everyone’s careful, they won’t catch the virus.Two weeks into the boot camp with Ms. Kreston, he is feeling much better, but longs for the outdoors. He is able to go into his apartment’s yard to play basketball, but he misses swimming and playing water polo and board games with friends. “I feel bored!” he said while jumping from foot to foot as if filled with energy to burn.Although he is “still very worried about Wuhan,” Kevin said is not so concerned about his own city. He doesn’t even worry about his mother, who has spent a lot of time recently buying masks and protective clothes for the hospital. “We’re often joking she’s the most dangerous person in our home and we should keep her in the bathroom,” he joked.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Kevin’s improved mood has a lot to do with the daily violin lessons with Ms. Kreston, he said. The two of them don’t just share videos back and forth, but also emoji messages about his violin playing.Kevin now practices four hours every day, and he said his technique has improved and his sound has become more beautiful. Ms. Kreston said she gave Kevin the Lalo concerto because it was passionate at points and sad at others. Kevin could use it to tap into his feelings, even complicated ones about death and loss.“The virus is terrible,” Kevin said, “but music gives us the confidence to overcome.” 