In Shift, Trudeau Says Canada Will Return Asylum Seekers to U.S.
By Ian AustenOTTAWA — Prime Minister Justin Trudeau reversed his government’s open immigration stance and said Canada would begin turning back asylum seekers who walk in from the United States outside of official border crossings.The move, which takes effect at 11:59 p.m. Friday, came as the countries prepared to close their mutual border for the first time since Canada became an independent nation and as countries around the world seal themselves off to limit the spread of the coronavirus.“This is a temporary measure which we’ll put in place for as long as the coronavirus crisis lasts,” Mr. Trudeau said only days after his government said such asylum seekers would only be quarantined. “These are exceptional measures to protect citizens.”By Friday afternoon 929 coronavirus cases had been reported in Canada, although that figure was rapidly rising. There have been 11 deaths.Canada’s move came as even more severe border restrictions were being applied around the world, and particularly in once border-free Europe. In Hungary, travelers have been stranded, roads clogged and tempers flared after Prime Minister Viktor Orban closed the border to all foreign nationals.Refugees have sought to leave the United States for Canada in increasing numbers since 2017, when President Trump took office and tightened restrictions on immigration; 54,739 asylum seekers have since crossed outside of regular border points and made refugee claims in Canada. They include many Haitians who sought to leave after the Trump administration indicated that they could lose the temporary protected status they gained in the United States after a 2010 earthquake ravaged their country.The departing refugees exposed a gap in an agreement between Canada and the United States, which is silent about people who cross not through an official port of entry but through fields or dormant trans-border roads and then make their claims in the nearest city. In those situations, United Nations treaties oblige Canada to let the claimants stay in the country until an immigration and refugee board resolves their cases. One of the busiest such entry points is Roxham Road in upstate New York, which offers access to Quebec.Friday’s change by Mr. Trudeau’s government was swiftly condemned by civil rights and refugee groups.“We are shocked and deeply disappointed at this news,” said Janet Dench, executive director of the Canadian Council for Refugees. “During a pandemic, we must uphold our commitments to protecting the rights of refugees and vulnerable migrants. This includes our fundamental legal obligation to not turn refugees away at the borders.”Justin Mohammed, a human rights law and policy campaigner at Amnesty International Canada, said Mr. Trudeau’s action was identical to measures used by the United States at its border with Mexico — steps his group views as a violation of international law.The decision to turn back irregular asylum seekers came three days after Mr. Trudeau’s government said that it planned only to quarantine them for two weeks once they crossed into Canada.Bill Blair, Canada’s public safety minister, did not respond to specific questions about the reversal. But he characterized the step as part of the closing of the border to all but “essential” travel and trade that was to take effect just before midnight on Friday. He said irregular border crossings were “a challenge to manage and regulate.”The asylum seekers, Mr. Blair said, would not be detained but simply turned around and sent back to the United States. Ms. Dench said she feared they would then be detained by American border officials if they do not hold legal immigration status.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.While Mr. Trudeau’s immigration policies and his swift acceptance of large numbers of Syrian refugees in 2016 were widely supported by Canadians, according to several polls, there has been less enthusiasm about the irregular crossings, particularly in Quebec. Politicians in that province, along with the Conservative Party opposition, have long called on the government to turn back asylum seekers.The method has not assured claimants that they can stay in Canada permanently, however. Of the cases heard, about 12,000 have been accepted and just under 11,000 have been rejected.While the number of claimants has fluctuated, about 50 daily asylum seekers have found an irregular border crossing and then made a claim in Canada. Mr. Blair said that number has fallen substantially during the coronavirus crisis.While officials emphasized that the action is temporary, Mr. Mohammed said he was skeptical.