To Enforce Coronavirus Rules, U.K. Police Use Drones, Shaming and Easter Egg Bans
By Stephen CastleLONDON — Panning out over scenic hills and lush green fields, the drone zooms in on six parked cars and a truck and flashes a stern message: “These vehicles should not be here.”Next to be shamed is a couple walking a dog on a lonely path. Captured on the film, released by the Derbyshire police, their stroll is judged “not essential” and therefore in breach of British social distancing rules.Despite posts yesterday highlighting issues of people still visiting the #PeakDistrict despite government guidance, the message is still not getting through. @DerPolDroneUnit have been out at beauty spots across the county, and this footage was captured at #CurbarEdge last night. pic.twitter.com/soxWvMl0lsJust weeks ago, Prime Minister Boris Johnson seemed genuinely shocked at the suggestion that the police should enforce a coronavirus lockdown in Britain.But that was before he introduced the most stringent restrictions in recent memory and instructed the authorities to enforce them.[Analysis: Coronavirus puts to the fore an improbable U.K. leader: Dominic Raab.]Some police officers have done so with such gusto that a ferocious debate is underway about the balance between collective responsibility and individual liberty.Few doubt the need for extraordinary measures to prevent the spread of an illness that has already claimed at least 1,789 lives in Britain and infected thousands more, including Mr. Johnson himself.But many Britons, who pride themselves on their history of resisting totalitarianism in World War II, do not take kindly to being told off for going for a drive or sitting on a bench in a park.Nor do small stores like being instructed that they should not sell chocolate Easter eggs because they are “nonessential” items.Jonathan Sumption, a former Supreme Court judge, offered praise on Monday for the work of many police forces but also expressed alarm at some overly zealous enforcement.“In some parts of the country, the police have been trying to stop people from doing things like traveling to take exercise in the open country, which are not contrary to the regulations, simply because ministers have said they would prefer us not to,” he told the BBC. “The police have no power to enforce ministers’ preferences, only legal regulations.”The behavior of the Derbyshire police was, he said, “frankly disgraceful,” adding: “This is what a police state is like.”Others have questioned whether there has been enough scrutiny of government emergency powers that were rushed through Parliament last week before lawmakers went on vacation.The police have many supporters, of course. One opposition lawmaker, Barry Sheerman, described them on Twitter as “professional sensitive & sensible in most situations.”For the most part, Britain’s police force is overstretched. In some parts of the country, officers are usually seen only when speeding from one emergency call to another.But several incidents have touched a nerve in a nation where individual liberty is taken seriously.In the past, attempts by governments to introduce national identity cards have failed largely because the idea of the police demanding to see such documents is regarded as alien to the country’s storied historical traditions.Five years ago, Britons celebrated with much fanfare the 800th anniversary of the signing of Magna Carta, a document that began the long process of proscribing the powers of the monarch.Britons may be hazy about its contents — hence the joke once made by Tony Hancock: “Does Magna Carta mean nothing to you? Did she die in vain?” — but they know it became a symbol of the preservation of fundamental freedoms.And to some, those are being trampled even if the rules in Britain are much less exacting than those imposed in several countries in continental Europe.Those who can work from home are encouraged — but not forced — to do so, and everyone is allowed to leave the house to shop for necessities or for exercise. Unlike in France, for example, Britons do not have to fill out paperwork to go outside.Stephen Kinnock, an opposition lawmaker, thought he was observing the rules when he posted a picture on Twitter of restrained celebrations on the 78th birthday of his father, Neil Kinnock, a former leader of the Labour Party. The meeting was outside, the men separated by a good distance.But the South Wales police disagreed and chastised him publicly as making a nonessential journey.In such situations, much relies on common sense and judgment. But circumstances have also left room for confusion, which is sometimes exacerbated by the government.For example, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, suggested on Tuesday that people should try to shop only once a week, though that is not part of official advice.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Colm O’Cinneide, professor of human rights law at University College, London, said that in some cases the police might be responding to political signals rather than the letter of the regulations.Another complication is that because Britain has a decentralized police force, rules can be interpreted in different ways in different regions. (Police chiefs have tried of late to try to ensure that enforcement is more uniform across the country.)But Mr. O’Cinneide said that cultural factors have come into play, too. There has been a general understanding in Britain that the public authorities and the police need to have a clear legal basis on which to act.“If they don’t have a specific need for those powers, there is a broad resistance to giving it to them,” he said. “That is part of a cultural tradition.”The speed of the introduction of the rules may also have contributed to the backlash. Mr. Johnson’s writings as a journalist reflected a strong streak of libertarianism, and, in the early days of the crisis, he was reluctant to restrict personal freedoms.But his sudden pivot to adopting strong measures has left the authorities scrambling to react.Citizens had an adjustment to make, too. Policing in Britain has generally had more of a light touch than it has in other European nations. There is no paramilitary police force — like the carabinieri in Italy — and British police officers are not routinely armed.But, as Mr. O’Cinneide said, “it is difficult to have much community policing when it is enforced by drones.”The Derbyshire police on Tuesday defended their actions, and the chief constable, Peter Goodman, told the BBC that the drone was deployed after food stores in villages were emptied and picturesque spots were inundated with sightseers.“Some forces will be doing not enough, perhaps, some forces have probably gone a bit too far and some sit in the middle,” he said. “Some would say we in Derbyshire have gone too far.“I genuinely believe that we haven’t, because we are trying to do everything through conversation and explanation.”But Mr. Goodman’s force came in for further criticism after it placed black dye in a pool at a disused quarry in order to discourage people from gathering there to swim.