Sugarcoating and Brutal Honesty: How Leaders Are Handling Coronavirus Crisis
By Megan SpeciaWorld leaders have spent the past several weeks grappling with the unexpected, as country after country has seen the coronavirus arrive at its borders and an outbreak has exploded into a pandemic.With the virus endangering citizens’ health and lockdowns ravaging the global economy, heads of government have taken different approaches in televised addresses and news briefings as they have explained their plans for combating the threat.“The main questions for these leaders,” said Jill Rutter, a senior fellow at the London-based Institute for Government, “is, can they convey a clear message and give people the reassurance they need while admitting this is an incredibly fast-moving, difficult world of real unknowns?”They also must “show that they understand that this is a massive human tragedy,” she added.It’s “quite a difficult balancing act,” she said. ​​In the United States, ​President Trump’s mercurial messages ​have been widely contrasted with the detailed briefings by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York. But ​elsewhere in the world, leaders ​have also taken ​approaches that run the gamut — from dismissive to serious to somber to combative — offering insights into governing in a time of crisis.transcriptIn this fight we can be in no doubt that each and every one of us is directly enlisted, each and every one of us is now obliged to join together to halt the spread of this disease. The way ahead is hard, and it is still true that many lives will sadly be lost. I want to be clear, we want to be clear, this is the worst public health crisis for a generation. Some people compare it to seasonal flu. Alas that is not right. Owing to the lack of immunity, this disease is more dangerous and it’s going to spread further, and I must level with you, level with the British public. More families, many more families, are going to lose loved ones before their time.Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain has been criticized for his mixed messaging, including by Ms. Rutter, who saw it as lacking transparency.In one of his first news conferences about the virus, he talked about a “clear plan” to contain it but detailed few concrete measures. Britain lagged behind neighboring European nations in fighting the virus, even as it became clear the country was poised for a major outbreak.Early on, Mr. Johnson also talked about the values of “herd immunity,” suggesting that allowing many in Britain to be exposed to the virus would help build immunity. He told the nation matter-of-factly: “Many more families are going to lose loved ones before their time.”Days later, he reversed course, putting the nation on lockdown and ordering Britons to stay at home.After he contracted Covid-19 and spent days in intensive care, Mr. Johnson’s video message this week turned more personal. He detailed his own battle with the illness and thanked the nurses who looked after him.Still, the addresses of the head of state, Queen Elizabeth II, rather than those of Mr. Johnson, the head of government, have seemed to tug more at people’s heartstrings.In mid-March, the 93-year-old queen, sequestered outside London at Windsor Castle, appealed for national solidarity, a resolute and apolitical alternative to Mr. Johnson’s message. She made an encore appearance a week later and compared Britain’s lockdown to the sacrifices Britons made during World War II.“Today, once again, many will feel a painful sense of separation from their loved ones,” the queen said. “But now, as then, we know deep down that it is the right thing to do.”transcriptHere are the things that we need from you. Today, we are asking people over 70 years of age or people who have compromised immunity or underlying respiratory conditions, to stay at home as much as they can. That means we need friends, family and neighbors to support our older New Zealanders and people who may be in this group by doing simple things, like keeping in contact and dropping off food or other supplies. When you do, make sure you are not sick, that you are using good handwashing practices and you’re keeping your distance. We also need everyone to start working differently. Many offices had plans for workers to work from home. Others have staggered meal breaks or shift-based working. We are now asking you to implement these plans. You’ll be pleased to know that we do consider both the Tooth Fairy and the Easter Bunny to be essential workers. And as you can imagine at this time, of course, they’re going to be potentially quite busy at home with their family as well and their own bunnies and so I say to the children of New Zealand if the Easter Bunny doesn’t make it to your household, then we have to understand that it’s a bit difficult at the moment for the bunny to perhaps get everywhere. But I’ve a bit of an idea that maybe in lieu of the bunny being able to make it to your home, you can create your own Easter hunt for all the children in your neighborhood.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern addressed New Zealanders on March 21 from the prime minister’s office, the first time since 1982 that a leader had chosen that setting, and outlined a clear, serious and pre-emptive plan for dealing with the coronavirus.“Over the past few weeks, the world has changed, and it has changed very quickly,” she said. “In New Zealand, we have moved to fight by going hard and going early. ”Her address unfurled with clarity, empathy and, most important, specifics. She has continued to host weekly question-and-answer sessions from her home over Facebook, donning a sweatshirt in one after putting her daughter to bed. On Wednesday, she announced plans to take a 20 percent pay cut for six months, along with her ministers, to acknowledge those who have lost jobs.“It is about leadership,” she said.Alastair Campbell, who worked as the press secretary for Tony Blair when he was Britain’s prime minister, was one of several commentators who commended Ms. Ardern as expressing her messages clearly and having an empathetic approach. He wrote in the newspaper The Independent, “Ardern is surely one of, if not the, standout leaders of this crisis.”New Zealand’s statistics are also standout, even given its relatively small size. Since the crisis began, the country has had just 1,000 confirmed cases and nine deaths.President Emmanuel Macron of France has primarily addressed the nation since the epidemic began in four solemn televised speeches.In his first, he announced stringent lockdown measures and was grim and resolute, invoking images of combat as he asserted that the country was “at war.”But this week in his latest appearance, Mr. Macron softened his martial tone, acknowledging that the government had made mistakes in distributing masks and protective gear to health workers, and mentioning other logistical shortcomings.“As soon as these problems were identified, we mobilized ourselves — the government, local authorities, companies, associations — to produce and to acquire the necessary supplies,” he said. “But I fully measure that, when you are on the front lines, it is hard to hear that a global shortage is preventing deliveries.”He also spoke candidly about the challenges in planning ahead.“When will we be able to go back to our prior life?” Mr. Macron asked. “Quite frankly, humbly, we have no definitive answer to that.”This rare admission of error may be making him more popular in France, where his approval ratings are the highest since he entered office.“He was always a very divisive figure before that, but I think the bit that Macron did well was to say, actually we weren’t as prepared as we should have been,” Ms. Rutter, the governance expert, said. “And he did admit mistakes.”transcriptI will not hesitate. My orders are some police, but the military. Shoot them dead. I will not hesitate to order to shoot you. So let this be a warning to all: Follow government at this time because it is really critical that we have order.For autocrats and strongmen, the pandemic has become an excuse to consolidate power further and extend their reach. For President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines, it has become the latest stage on which to greenlight extrajudicial killings, an issue throughout his time in office.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Initially dismissive of the coronavirus, Mr. Duterte reversed course late last month, introducing stringent measures, including a lockdown, in a bid to stem its spread. In an address earlier this month, he threatened those who considered breaking the lockdown, instructing the police and military to take matters into their own hands.“Shoot them dead,” he said. “Do you understand? Dead. Instead of causing trouble, I’ll send you to the grave.”The government has since passed legislation giving Mr. Duterte emergency powers and $5.4 billion to deal with the pandemic, and the ability to put in place even more draconian steps.Paired with his public statements, Mr. Duterte’s actions have set off alarm bells for human rights organizations. Amnesty International called for Mr. Duterte to “immediately cease his dangerous incitement to violence.”The Philippines has one of the worst coronavirus outbreaks in Southeast Asia, and a weak and strained public health system. There is no widespread testing in the country.Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany shocked some during one of her earliest news briefings on the outbreak when she outlined a stark possibility: In a worst-case situation, she said, up to 70 percent of the German population could become infected.At a time when other leaders were hoping to lessen the blow in their messaging, she stood out. But her frankness put her in a strong position. It was also a comfortable position for her; she is a science-minded leader who studied physics and has a doctorate in quantum chemistry.“This plays to a lot of Merkel’s strengths, and in a sense the significant status she has in Germany,” Ms. Rutter said. “It plays to her sensible, scientific, very calm but authoritative style, and she is more naturally at home with the science, more than other leaders.”Ms. Merkel went even further in a no-nonsense national address a week later, on March 18, the first during her 14 years in office.“The situation is serious; take it seriously,” Ms. Merkel said, calling the crisis the biggest challenge facing Germans since World War II.She has been rewarded for her candor. Since the outbreak began, her approval ratings have gone through the roof, rising 11 points from before the outbreak to a record 79 percent.This week, as she laid out plans for a step-by-step loosening of the country’s lockdown measures, her attention to detail and her cautious plan to restart the economy were again heralded.“Having grown up in communist East Germany,” wrote Judy Dempsey, a senior fellow at Carnegie Europe, “Merkel understands the balance between security and transparency.”