U.K. Extends Lockdown 3 Weeks, With No Clear Exit Strategy
By Mark Landler and Stephen CastleLONDON — Britain confirmed on Thursday that it would prolong its lockdown for at least three more weeks as part of efforts to keep smothering the spread of the coronavirus. But the government was far less clear about the steps it is taking that would allow it to relax restrictions later without causing another outbreak.The widely expected extension was announced by Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary who has assumed the duties of Prime Minister Boris Johnson while he recuperates from the virus at his country residence, Chequers.“We’re now at both a delicate and dangerous phase in this pandemic,” Mr. Raab said at a news conference. Lifting the lockdown, he said, would “risk all the progress we’ve made. Now is not the moment to give the coronavirus a second chance.”With the extension, the lockdown will last at least until the second week of May.Relaxing the restrictions would not only raise the risk of new outbreak, Mr. Raab said, it would also damage the economy. The government would likely be forced to impose a second lockdown, he said, which would shatter confidence.Mr. Raab set out five prerequisites for easing restrictions. They included a “sustained and consistent fall in the daily death rates,” confidence that hospitals could cope with the flow of patients, more capacity for testing, more protective equipment, and a judgment, made with the advice of government health experts, that there would not be a second wave of infections.With 861 new deaths announced on Thursday — 100 more than the day before — along with complaints about a lack of masks and gloves, and a major shortfall in testing, Britain appears far from meeting three of those prerequisites. Only the hospitals, with a small decline in the number of coronavirus patients and a growing number of beds, are a bright spot.Mr. Raab also offered no details about how Britain might exit from the lockdown when those preconditions are met, unlike Germany, Austria and other European countries, where officials have talked about plans for reopening schools and some shops. The government has resisted talking about an exit strategy, arguing that doing so might confuse the public and encourage Britons to reduce compliance with social distancing measures.But its silence, at a time when Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany offered her citizens a detailed blueprint, sowed doubts about whether the government has a strategy for the next phase of the crisis, beyond asking people to stay at home, which it has done with considerable success.Some analysts blamed a lack of coordination between government departments, a failure they attributed to the absence of Mr. Johnson. During his first months as prime minister, he had established a command-and-control style of government, with him and a small circle of aides in Downing Street at the center.Mr. Raab, a Conservative politician chosen for the Cabinet mainly for his staunch pro-Brexit views, cannot hope to exercise Mr. Johnson’s authority. He is surrounded by ambitious colleagues like Matt Hancock, the health secretary, and Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the Exchequer, whose departments are more deeply involved in the pandemic response than the Foreign Office he oversees.Britain’s testing record has come under the harshest scrutiny. The country got off to a slow start and it continues to test only hospitalized patients, doctors and nurses, and more recently, people who work in nursing homes.Mr. Hancock pledged to increase the number of tests to 100,000 a day by the end of the month, but Britain is still testing less than a fifth of that number. The government said it currently had the capacity to conduct 35,000 tests a day, but only 16,000 people showed up to get tested on the last day for which numbers are available. The government attributed the shortfall to the Easter holiday weekend.“They say they’re going to do more testing, but I don’t see any evidence,” said Dr. Bharat Pankhania, an expert in infectious diseases at the University of Exeter Medical School. “We didn’t work hard enough to begin with, we didn’t work hard subsequently, and we haven’t worked hard enough during the shutdown.”For Britain to relax the restrictions, he and other experts said, the government would need to organize an aggressive program of testing and contact tracing for the general population. Officials have said they plan to expand the eligibility for testing but have yet to introduce or even commit to such a program.The lack of planning is drawing criticism from some of the government’s most influential outside advisers. Prof. Neil Ferguson, an epidemiologist at Imperial College who is on the government’s scientific advisory council, said Britain had put more effort into planning for Brexit than for responding to the coronavirus.“Decisions certainly need to be accelerated and real progress made,” he told the BBC. “We need to put in place an infrastructure, a command and control structure, and a novel organization for this.”Professor Ferguson predicted that some form of social distancing would have to remain in place for many months, perhaps until a vaccine is widely available. He led an Imperial College report that predicted an uncontrolled epidemic could kill between 250,000 and 500,000 people in Britain. That prompted Mr. Johnson to change course in March and impose the lockdown. (The report also played a role in persuading the White House to embrace tighter restrictions.)Britain’s decision to prolong the lockdown came as officials expressed hope that the toll from the virus would begin to diminish.Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, said the rate of transmission in the country had fallen to below one, though it was likely still above one in some hospitals and nursing homes. When an infected person, on average, transmits the virus to less than one other individual, that is considered a key benchmark for preventing the virus from spreading.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Britain passed 100,000 confirmed cases of the virus on Thursday, with a total of 13,729 deaths in hospitals. Several thousand additional deaths in nursing homes and private residences are not reported in the daily figures.The number of people being treated in hospitals in London and other cities has fallen, which — combined with the construction of several field hospitals — has freed up thousands of beds in the National Health Service.Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical officer, said he was worried people with other illness were avoiding hospitals because they worried about infection or did not want to burden them. “It is really critical for people to realize,” he said, “if they have other medical emergencies, the N.H.S. is open for business.”As he announced the three week extension, Mr. Raab, who was standing at a lectern plastered with the government’s three-sentence mantra — “Stay Home. Protect the N.H.S. Save Lives”— said he understood the frustration of people with the lack of a clear path.