Turkey Orders All Citizens to Wear Masks as Infections Rise
By Carlotta GallISTANBUL — Turkey has ordered all citizens to wear masks when shopping or visiting crowded public places and announced that it will deliver masks to every family, free of charge, as coronavirus infections increase in the country of 80 million.The order is the latest in a gradual tightening of antivirus measures by a government that has insisted that the virus was under control and has resisted a complete lockdown.Turkey has over 34,000 confirmed cases of the virus and has registered 725 deaths. More than 1,400 patients are in intensive care units and at least 600 medical workers have been infected, according to figures released Tuesday by the Health Ministry.The number of confirmed cases places Turkey among the top 10 currently worst affected countries, and reflects a steep rise since its first confirmed death from the disease on March 17.The health minister, Dr. Fahrettin Koca, said on Monday, however, that the increase in confirmed cases was low compared with the increase in testing, which has been ramped up to more than 20,000 per day.President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has introduced gradual measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus, asking people to stay at home and imposing a curfew on those over 65 and under 20, but has resisted a nationwide lockdown.In televised speeches, he has repeatedly reassured Turks that the government has the virus under control. “Turkey is one of the most prepared countries for this global pandemic and the major crisis that has started with it,” he said in an address on Saturday.Turkey has been praised by Western analysts for taking an early and proactive approach to the virus. It moved quickly to close travel with China, where the outbreak of the virus first occurred, and Iran, a major regional hub for the virus, and quarantined people returning from those countries.But at the same time Turkey promoted itself as a safe destination for business and tourism. As the country faces an increasingly difficult economic downturn, and already suffers high unemployment and inflation, Mr. Erdogan sought to keep industry and tourism — an important source of income for the country — going.Although little official data has been released on the spread of the virus in Turkey, Dr. Koca, who is a physician and founder of a private chain of hospitals, said the first known case of infection was in a person who had contact with Europe. He warned that the rise of infection in Europe presented a serious risk for Turkey.Turkish media are citing official studies that show the main sources of infection are travelers arriving from Europe and religious pilgrims returning from the Middle East in the days before the first case was confirmed on March 11.The two cities most affected are Istanbul, and the western city of Izmir, both centers of industry and tourism, with 60 percent of the cases coming from Istanbul, a city of 16 million.Among the earliest cases in Turkey were a pharmacist and his employee in downtown Istanbul, and a trader, returning from Italy, who infected his relatives working in Istanbul’s Grand Bazaar, a large covered market in the city center.Pilgrims returning from Saudi Arabia and Iraq have led to the spread of the virus in central Turkey. Those returning were asked to self-isolate and later returnees were placed in quarantine facilities but the measures did not completely prevent transmission of the virus.The movement of citizens inside the country, barred since last week, has allowed the virus to spread to every province.Opposition politicians, including the mayors of two of the biggest cities, Ankara and Istanbul, have called for stricter measures, including a complete lockdown. Those cities have been among the hardest hit by the virus.Selva Demiralp, a professor of economics at Istanbul’s Koc University, posted findings of a group of economists that the economic cost of containing the pandemic immediately, in April, would be less than if a lockdown was delayed and then enforced by necessity in May.Health costs would increase with a delay, and economic fallout, especially for tourism, would worsen if prolonged, she said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Erdogan has closed many public places, including bars, restaurants and mosques, but he has allowed industry, construction firms and public transportation to continue working.In a speech to the nation on Monday night he said it was important for the country to continue producing and promised financial aid to families of workers.“Our real fight will start after the pandemic,” he said. “That is the reason we emphasize keeping production going. Every factory of ours will go on producing. Our farmers will not leave an acre of land unplanted. Our service sector will keep both its domestic and foreign ties alive.”“We don’t have any issues on diagnosis and treatment in our hospitals,” he added. “Thankfully, we’ve so far not encountered any significant issues in terms of health services, food and sanitation supplies and public safety.”But Baris Yarkadas, a former opposition politician and journalist, said that testing across the country remained inadequate and may hide a far larger rate of infection. He complained that Turkey had delayed making critical decisions because of its concern about the effects on the economy.“We knew it was spreading from China but we were so late in taking precautions we missed the opportunity,” he said in a telephone interview. “Turkey could have been like South Korea but we are like Italy and the United States.”He blamed officials of Mr. Erdogan’s political party, the Justice and Development Party, for lack of vision.