Jakarta’s Trash Mountain: ‘When People Are Desperate for Jobs, They Come Here’
Supported byBy Adam Dean and Richard C. PaddockBEKASI, Indonesia — Even in the pouring rain, in the middle of the night, they are out scavenging, wearing headlamps to scan a mountain of rotting garbage more than 15 stories high.The trash pickers, some trudging up the heap in mismatched plastic boots, use a hooked metal tool called a “ganco” to flip items over their heads and into large rattan baskets strapped on their backs. A few sort through the trash with their bare hands.The stench is overpowering, but it’s only one of many workplace hazards. As they pick through the jumble looking for discarded wood, cardboard, plastic tarps and anything else that can be recycled, they must be careful not to come too close to the bulldozers distributing the waste across an ever-rising plateau. Landslides are a constant danger.This is Bantar Gebang, one of the world’s largest landfills, more than 200 football fields in size, accepting as much as 7,000 tons of waste a day from Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital.Processing all that trash is a 24-hour operation. On a typical day, a thousand orange trucks, filled with garbage and surrounded by hordes of buzzing flies, line up at the base of the landfill to dump their loads. Like a mechanical bucket brigade, giant excavators then relay the waste to the top, more than 150 feet above.Dozens of squalid villages have sprung up around the mountain. Officials say about 6,000 people reside near the landfill, eking out a living from the trash. Local residents put the number at 20,000.In some families, children as young as 5 scour for usable trash alongside their parents, said Asep Gunawan, the head of Bantar Gebang district, which includes the landfill.“They have kindergarten and Quran study there, and when they finish that, they help their parents,” Mr. Asep said. “It is easy to pick trash with just an iron stick. And they have no other choice.”The trash pickers, known in Indonesian as “pemulung,” typically earn from $2 to $10 a day, from the plastic, metal, wood and electronic waste they collect. Even animal bones have value, used to make jewelry or as an ingredient in floor tiles or concrete.A few entrepreneurs have set up makeshift shelters on wooden pallets where they sell drinks, snacks and cigarettes to those working the pile.When the facility is operating at full tilt, hundreds of scavengers swarm around the heavy equipment rumbling on the mountain. But the global economic slowdown caused by the coronavirus pandemic has reached even here, adding to the misery.Most recycling companies that buy waste from the trash pickers have closed their doors, so fewer pemulung are working because they have no place to sell what they collect, said Resa Boenard, co-founder of Seeds of Bantar Gebang, a nonprofit helping the community.New social distancing rules imposed by the provincial government took effect this month in Bantar Gebang, prompting even more trash pickers to stay off the pile.“Since the virus has spread around the world, it has made life even harder now,” Ms. Resa said. “Most of them are staying at home because they cannot sell plastic anymore.”As of Sunday, Indonesia had reported 8,882 confirmed cases of the coronavirus, with 743 deaths. Jakarta, a city of about 11 million, has been the hardest hit, with about half the confirmed cases. The virus has also spread to neighboring communities, including Bekasi, where the landfill is.No cases of the virus have been reported in the landfill’s villages, but no one has been tested there, either, said Mr. Asep, the district head. The trash pickers don’t qualify for government coronavirus aid because they are not registered as residents.There is a widespread belief in Indonesia that living in unsanitary conditions helps people build immunity to diseases like the coronavirus — an unscientific view that will be put dangerously to the test in the landfill’s shantytowns.“People in Bantar Gebang are not really scared about this virus,” said Ms. Resa, 34. “I don’t see it has really changed their habits.”She was 6 when her family moved to the area. Her parents bought a rice field, but it was eventually swallowed up by the ever-growing mountain of trash.At school, other children called her “Princess of the Dump” because her clothes smelled of the landfill. The nickname stuck. But she excelled in her studies and a Turkish family gave her a scholarship to help her through university.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.She could have been one of the few to escape the landfill for a better life, but she returned to help the families there, especially the children.Now, with the economic slowdown, her organization helps feed 600 families a day and has launched a campaign seeking donations.“People don’t need masks or hand sanitizer,” she said. “People need food to feed their families.”One volunteer in the makeshift community is Juni Romamti Ezer Laumakani, a soap salesman who lives about 20 minutes away. He has been giving children at the dump free guitar lessons for 15 years.Because of the pandemic, he stopped the lessons a month ago but still visits the villages to check on the families and offer encouragement.“Even though they have collected a lot of trash, they have no place to sell it,” said Mr. Juni, 40. “So those things have no value. And it’s stressing them out, too. There’s no income but they still have expenses.”The landfill opened more than 30 years ago, and residents of the surrounding district have long complained about the stench and the skin problems they suffer.“The ground water in the landfill area is contaminated, and they cannot use the water anymore,” said Mr. Asep, the local official. “All of the people are upset.”Most of those who have migrated to Banter Gebang were farmers whose crops failed during the dry season. Some have stayed for a decade or more.“When people are desperate for jobs, they come here,” Ms. Resa said.Although fewer trash pickers are working, the garbage trucks keep coming. Many items that could be recycled are instead being buried under the incoming crush.Ms. Resa hopes Jakarta residents will get the message to throw away less stuff.“We are telling people in Jakarta, ‘please reduce your waste,’” she said. “We can’t process it because we can’t sell it. It just makes the mountain grow higher.”