‘It’s Very Scary’: U.K. Food Banks Close as Coronavirus Stalls Donations
By Ceylan YeginsuLONDON — As panicked shoppers in Britain empty supermarket shelves and hoard goods amid the coronavirus outbreak, food banks that depend on donations are struggling to stay afloat, and some have been forced to shut down.Vulnerable families who depend on emergency food packages to survive received limited supplies this week as food banks across Britain fell short on items like pasta, tinned vegetables, long-life milk, baby food, diapers and toilet paper. And the winter months, when people in crisis are less likely to meet the basic costs of living, are particularly critical.“It’s very scary, because everyone is walking around with bags and trolleys full of food stocking up for the next few months, while I’m worrying about whether I have enough food to feed the children this week,” said Angie Fowler, a mother of three who depends on the Chalk Farm food bank in northern London. “If this place closes down, I don’t know what we’ll do. We have no backup.”Even before the coronavirus outbreak, food banks in the country were struggling to meet demands that have steadily increased in recent years. Last year, the Trussell Trust, Britain’s largest network of food banks, delivered 1.6 million three-day emergency food supplies to people in crisis — an 18.8 percent increase on the previous year.“It is possible that food banks will face increased demand as people lose income, at the same time as food donations drop or staff and volunteers are unavailable, due to measures rightly put in place to slow the spread of infection,” said Emma Revie, the Trussell Trust’s chief executive.[Update: Boris Johnson, U.K. Prime Minister, has the coronavirus.]“All of this comes when food banks are already dealing with a record level of need for emergency food,” she said. “We’re working with our network on how best to support people as the situation unfolds.”The Islington food bank in northern London said on Monday that it would shut down next week because of a decline in donations and volunteer staff. Other food banks have been reducing their services.The North Paddington food bank in western London, which provides food to more than 100 households each week, said its donations were down 25 percent. On Wednesday, volunteers handed out pre-prepared packages and limited the time people spent on the premises.“We are just focusing on keeping people safe and ensuring they have enough to eat through this crisis,” said James Quayle, the food bank’s manager. “Right now, we are working hard to maintain our own supply chain as donations have become less reliable.”Mr. Quayle said he was surprised by how calm people at the food bank have been in the onset of the outbreak, especially when compared with the panicked shoppers in the supermarkets. “No one is asking for extra,” he said.Most food banks anticipate having to deliver more food packages in the coming weeks as people go into self-isolation, an increase that will require additional staff and resources.The Sufra food bank, which serves a large number of refugees and asylum seekers, has canceled most of its services. Instead it is providing limited food parcels, and a lack of supplies is forcing most recipients to closely ration their packages.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“All the indications are that the U.K. is on the precipice of a recession, which will mean that financial donations to the charity will also start drying up while demand for food aid rises,” said Rajesh Makwana, the food bank’s director. “Add to this the impact of austerity and universal credit, and you can see why this really is the perfect storm.”Britain’s biggest supermarket chains, including Asda, Tesco and Sainsbury’s, introduced restrictions on purchases on Wednesday after shopping aisles were stripped bare within hours of some stores’ opening. They will also reserve the first hour after opening to older people and vulnerable people to ensure them access to essential supplies.Adam Connell, a volunteer who has been delivering packages to seniors and other vulnerable people in recent weeks, fears that the outbreak will push struggling people deeper into poverty and social exclusion. Around 14 million people live in poverty in Britain — about one-fifth of the overall population — according to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, an independent social change organization.The loss of food banks carries implications far beyond the distribution of food, executives say.“Foodbanks don’t just provide food — they provide a support network and a social platform for people who would otherwise feel alone and excluded,” Mr. Connell said. “If the spread of the virus gets to a point of crisis like we’ve seen in Italy, I’m not sure how we will be able to continue providing these services.”Schools will close starting on Friday throughout Britain, and many parents worry about the added pressures of providing lunches for their children without the help of food banks and other social services.“It’s already difficult to feed the children during the school holidays,” Ms. Fowler said. “If the schools stay shut and we’re stuck at home all day, I’m not sure how we’ll manage.”