Pompeo Cuts $1 Billion in Afghan Aid as 2 Leaders Reject Push for Unity
By Mujib Mashal and Lara JakesKABUL, Afghanistan — The State Department said it was cutting $1 billion in aid to Afghanistan this year, and potentially another $1 billion in 2021, after Secretary of State Mike Pompeo failed to persuade rival Afghan leaders in a meeting on Monday in Kabul to support a unified government, which American diplomats consider crucial to preventing peace negotiations from falling apart.Mr. Pompeo’s announcement came as he was flying back to the United States after meeting with President Ashraf Ghani and the Afghan former chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah, in an attempt to mediate between the two rivals who both claim to be the legitimate president — a crisis that threatens to split the government apart and sink hopes of ending the war.For the top American diplomat to travel halfway around the world in the middle of the global coronavirus epidemic signaled how seriously the United States was taking the internal Afghan bickering and the risks posed for both countries. And the cutoff in aid, a major blow to the Afghan government, revealed just how frustrated the United States was with the impasse, which further imperils an already precarious peace deal.“The United States is disappointed in them and what their conduct means for Afghanistan and our shared interests,” Mr. Pompeo said in a statement. “Their failure has harmed U.S.-Afghan relations and, sadly, dishonors those Afghan, Americans and coalition partners who have sacrificed their lives and treasure in the struggle to build a new future for this country.”“This leadership failure poses a direct threat to U.S. national interests,” Mr. Pompeo said.Speaking to reporters aboard his plane, Mr. Pompeo would not say from where the $1 billion would be cut but made clear that American support for Afghan security forces would continue. “We are going to continue to do everything we need to do to support those Afghan security forces,” he said. “It is central.”The money could be restored, Mr. Pompeo said, if “Afghan leaders choose to form an inclusive government that can provide security and participate in the peace process.”He also said the United States will send $15 million to the country to help stop the spread of the coronavirusMr. Ghani was declared the winner of a bitterly disputed election last month and was inaugurated on March 9. His opponent, Mr. Abdullah, also declared himself winner and held his own inauguration next door, on the same day.Days of American efforts, into the early hours of inauguration day, failed to prevent the announcement of two presidents and keep the country’s elite united around the peace process.During his eight hours in Kabul, Mr. Pompeo met with both Afghan leaders, separately and then together, in an attempt to find a way to get them to work together.But Mr. Pompeo was unable to persuade them, and left the capital with the political crisis unresolved.On his way back to Washington on Monday night, Mr. Pompeo stopped in Doha, Qatar, to meet with Taliban officials who have been negotiating with American envoys on a peace process.Mr. Pompeo seemed to indicate that the Taliban had been a better partner in the peace process than the government in Kabul.“They committed to reducing violence and they’ve largely done that,” Mr. Pompeo said when asked if the Taliban had lived up to its pledges in the peace agreements. “And they are working towards delivering their team to the ultimate negotiations.”The secretary of state’s visit came a day after Afghan government officials met with Taliban delegates to discuss details of a prisoner release that is a part of the deal. Balancing coronavirus concerns with fears that a painstakingly negotiated peace deal could fall apart, the two sides met by videoconference on Sunday — a notable approach, given the Taliban’s origins as a national government that largely banned television and music.Though the meeting between the Taliban and government officials was not the formal start of direct talks between the two sides — that step is predicated on reaching agreement on the prisoner exchange — the technical discussion was the first negotiating meeting between them since the United States and the insurgents signed a deal last month.The prisoner exchange, involving up to 5,000 Taliban prisoners and 1,000 Afghan government prisoners, as called for in the deal the Americans signed, has been an extreme point of contention. The prisoners were supposed to have been released before the beginning of Afghan negotiations on March 10.Mr. Ghani’s government has vehemently disagreed with the terms the United States agreed to with the Taliban, delaying the future steps of the peace deal. The United States’ special envoy, Zalmay Khalilzad, has been in Kabul for several weeks trying to find a solution to the prisoner release and calm the political crisisAfter much shuttle diplomacy, Mr. Ghani agreed only to a phased release of the prisoners in small batches and conditioned it on the Taliban halting their attacks — something the insurgents have said goes against what they have signed with the United States.In his statement Monday, Mr. Pompeo criticized the Afghan government for refusing to “take practical steps” to release prisoners as a confidence-building step for peace negotiations. But most of his criticism was leveled at Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah for failing to unite and appoint a team of negotiators that would represent all sides of the Afghan government.In the Sunday videoconference between the Taliban and the government, an American team led by Mr. Khalilzad and a team of Qatari diplomats facilitated the discussions.“Today, the US and Qatar facilitated the first Afghan government to Taliban technical talks on prisoner releases, via Skype video conferencing,” Mr. Khalilzad wrote in a series of Twitter posts late on Sunday. “Everyone clearly understands the coronavirus threat makes prisoner releases that much more urgent.”Suhail Shaheen, a spokesman for the Taliban’s negotiating team, said the talks had “solely focused on prisoner release, and there were initial agreements on some issues regarding the release of prisoners.”Mr. Shaheen said the sides would hold another videoconference on Tuesday.Hamdullah Mohib, Afghanistan’s national security adviser, suggested that the call had covered other issues to make the prisoner release possible.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“All sides emphasized the importance of a reduction in violence, direct negotiations, and a permanent and comprehensive cease-fire,” Mr. Mohib said in a statement on Twitter.In the days before signing the deal with the United States, the Taliban observed a partial cease-fire with the Afghan government. But that deal included no agreement on a lasting violence reduction that was envisioned as part of the ensuing talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban.In recent weeks, the Taliban have made clear that they see violence as a major part of their leverage in talks, and have intensified their operations across Afghanistan. The Afghan government forces have largely remained in a defensive mode and are beginning to suffer heavy casualties.In one of the most brutal Taliban attacks since the group signed the deal with the United States, insurgents stormed an outpost in southern Zabul Province and killed at least 24 members of the Afghan security forces on Thursday, torching their outposts and burning the bodies to a point that many were unrecognizable.The Taliban have also ramped up attacks in the north. In response to an overnight Taliban attack in Kunduz Province that had begun late on Saturday in Imam Saheb district, Afghan forces called for an airstrike on Sunday that resulted in the deaths of at least nine civilians — including four women and two children — according to Gul Bai, a local police commander.