As Coronavirus Strikes Prisons, Hundreds of Thousands Are Released
By Ernesto Londoño, Manuela Andreoni and Letícia CasadoRIO DE JANEIRO — Prisons across the world have become powerful breeding grounds for the coronavirus, prompting governments to release hundreds of thousands of inmates in a mad scramble to curb the spread of the contagion behind bars.The pandemic has also set off prisoner rebellions as angry inmates have called new attention to chronic problems in corrections systems in many countries, including overcrowding, filth and limited access to health care.In Brazil, which has one of the largest and most overloaded prison systems, inmates have recorded videos behind bars threatening to kill guards unless the government moves swiftly to improve their conditions.In Colombia, a prison riot last month by inmates concerned about catching the virus left 23 prisoners dead. And on Friday in a Buenos Aires penitentiary, inmates angered over the lack of virus protection rioted for nine hours, climbing on the roof, burning mattresses and displaying a banner that read, “We refuse to die in prison.”As the virus plunged virtually every country into crisis mode last month, United Nations experts on detention, the World Health Organization and human rights activists have urged governments to reduce their prisoner populations swiftly.“In many countries, detention facilities are overcrowded, in some cases dangerously so,” Michelle Bachelet, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, said in a statement. “The consequences of neglecting them are potentially catastrophic.”At least 125 countries hold more prisoners than their correctional systems were designed for, including 20 that have more than two times the number of inmates they’re equipped to secure, according to the World Prison Brief, a database kept by the Institute for Crime & Justice Policy Research at the University of London.The virus’s ease of spreading behind bars became clear in February, when at least 555 inmates in China were infected at facilities in Hubei, Shandong and Zhejiang Provinces.In response, the government dismissed several wardens for their failure to prevent the outbreak, forbade prison visits and required guards at several facilities to remain at their posts for weeks.Five prisons in Hunan designated a building within each facility to isolate infected prisoners and guards. Inmates in a Shandong prison were taken to hotels for quarantine after a prison guard returning from Wuhan, where the coronavirus was first reported, infected other guards and inmates.As the virus quickly spread across borders in the following weeks, officials in many countries suspended prison visits but struggled to impose social-distancing measures in teeming wards.Iran, which has been one of the hardest-hit countries, in mid-March temporarily released roughly 85,000 detainees, including some political prisoners. But human rights advocates have also criticized Iran for what they call its harsh suppression of inmates who have protested their risk of infection.Ms. Bachelet said on Wednesday that Iran may have accelerated executions of prisoners on death row who joined some of those protests.This month Turkey’s Parliament passed a law authorizing the temporary release of 45,000 prisoners. Indonesia has released at least 30,000.Thousands of prisoners, including some migrants, have also been released in the United States.In Brazil, officials reported four deaths, 104 confirmed coronavirus cases and 145 suspected ones among prisoners as of Sunday. The country says it has released about 30,000 prisoners. But that figure is not significantly higher than the typical release rate, according to experts.Experts say the scope of the problem in Brazil behind bars is unclear because only 682 of the country’s more than 773,000 prisoners have been tested.Drauzio Varella, a doctor who has studied and written books about the health care needs of prisoners in Brazil, said a disproportionate number suffer from serious conditions, including diabetes, obesity and hypertension.“Prisons in Brazil often have double or triple the capacity they were built for, with people sleeping on the floor,” he said. “One person coughing can infect everyone else.”Even with the releases, tensions are escalating inside several Brazil facilities, where some gang leaders are threatening violent rebellions and others have smuggled out messages to relatives saying they’re going hungry.A group of gang members detained at a prison in Minas Gerais state recently recorded a video calling on all criminal gangs, which hold considerable sway inside Brazilian prisons, to join forces to wage “war against the government.”Reading from a statement, one of the prisoners said they were not being provided with medicine and complained about rancid food. He threatened to direct gang members outside to set buses on fire and execute prison guards as detainees standing behind him mimicked a decapitation.“This virus that is circulating around the world is going to kill many brothers in prison,” he said. “We’re prepared to knock down these prisons.”A state official said in a statement that the men in the video had been identified, and that the authorities had confiscated the cellphone used to make the video.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.To prevent transmission of the virus, officials in Brazil have suspended visits from relatives and lawyers, and sought to step up hygiene measures at federal and state prisons.While Brazilian judges have approved thousands of early release petitions, top Justice Ministry officials have said it would be a mistake to release prisoners en masse, arguing that would create risks to public safety.Prisoner advocates say it is more risky for the inmates to remain in prisons.Pastoral Carcerária Nacional, a Christian organization that supports prisoners and their families, said many relatives of the incarcerated have been barred from providing them with food and hygiene items.“Prisoners get the bulk of material support from what their families can bring, because the food they are given inside is terrible and scarce,” said Sister Petra Silvia Pfaller, the group’s coordinator. “Even before the pandemic they were already going hungry.”Andrelina Amelia Ferreira, who heads the Mothers of Jail Movement in São Paulo, said she had received hundreds of messages from women alarmed about the tidbits of information they have gleaned from prisons that are now inaccessible.One woman received a handwritten note from her husband, who reported running a high fever and having body aches. Lacking enough food, he told her, had prompted him to eat clumps of toilet paper and toothpaste. “I’m scared I will die in prison,” the note said. “I’m starving in this damn place.”Vincent Ballon, the top expert on detention issues at the International Committee of the Red Cross, said the coronavirus crisis should prompt governments across the world to reconsider the laws and policies that have led to overcrowded and poorly run prisons in the first place.“We hope that this will be an opportunity to rethink deprivation of liberty, especially things like pretrial detention and immigration detention,” he said.Mário Guerreiro, who heads the National Council of Justice, a monitoring group in Brazil with oversight of the country’s prison system, said the pandemic had made glaringly clear the shortcomings of that system, which has grown exponentially in recent decades without a commensurate investment to build capacity.Brazil has the world’s third largest prison population, behind the United States and China, according to the World Prison Brief. Overcapacity average in Brazilian prisons is 168 percent.“Brazil has prisons where humanitarian conditions are tantamount to concentration camps,” Mr. Guerreiro said. “It’s a humanitarian crisis.”