How a Hong Kong Campus Became a Fiery Battlefield
The siege of PolyU last November was the climax of intense confrontations between the Hong Kong police, who had exhausted their tolerance for dissent, and protesters who refused to give up their freedoms without a fight.Watch video from the front lines at PolyU as the area was turned into an urban battlefield. Listen to masked protesters, too frightened to speak openly, describe on camera how they barricaded themselves inside university buildings and desperately tried to escape days after riot police stormed the school. Reporters and editors in The New York Times’s Hong Kong and Beijing bureaus collaborated with members of our visual investigations team to reconstruct the chaotic events leading up to the siege of PolyU for this episode of “The Weekly.” They include Keith Bradsher, the Shanghai bureau chief who used to be the bureau chief in Hong Kong; Javier C. Hernández, a correspondent in Beijing; Barbara Marcolini of the visual investigations team; Tiffany May, who is based in the Hong Kong bureau; Edward Wong, a diplomatic and international correspondent in Washington who previously served as Beijing bureau chief; and Gillian Wong, The Times’s China editor in Hong Kong.[Join the conversation about @theweekly on Twitter and Instagram. #TheWeeklyNYT]transcript[MUSIC PLAYING] “My mom tried to come to pick me up. She is very worried about me.” This was a fight over rule of law and over autonomy. It was a fight that both sides were determined to win. And it culminated at Polytechnic University. On one side, a generation determined to defend the freedoms it had grown up with. On the other, a government security force overseen by the most powerful authoritarian leader on the planet. For both sides, the future was at stake.A wide cross-section of Hong Kong society supports the protests, but young residents of the territory are the ones driving the movement and going daily to the front lines. Many of them grew up in Hong Kong after the 1997 handover and watched as rule of law, freedom of speech and other rights they had thought were guaranteed by Hong Kong’s semiautonomous status slowly eroded under Communist Party rule.President Xi Jinping is the most authoritarian leader to rule China since Mao, and the constraints he has imposed across the mainland are also felt in Hong Kong. As the protests have intensified, he has shown he has no intention of giving in to the demonstrators or of withdrawing his support for the territory’s much-criticized chief executive, Carrie Lam.The protesters have become as focused now on police brutality as they are on wider political demands. The police have become more forceful in trying to stop the protests, and this has led to more demonstrations against the police, forming a cycle that has been hard to break.The protests started peacefully, but grew more contentious and quickly divided and disrupted the city. Nearly one in seven Hong Kong residents were reported to have turned out to protest the extradition bill. As the police cracked down, some of the protesters grew increasingly aggressive and were accused of rioting — a crime that’s punished with up to 10 years in prison. Many of the protesters wore masks, to protect themselves from pepper spray and tear gas, and to conceal their identities from authorities. The protesters who agreed to speak to “The Weekly” about their experiences did so only if they wouldn’t be identified.Hong Kong Polytechnic University, the site of the fiercest violence between the police and protesters, opened for two weeks after the siege but closed again two weeks later. Other schools and universities in the city have also been closed until March in a measure to help contain the coronavirus. PolyU will conduct online classes.The protest movement persists, but it’s taken a hit. Tens of thousands of protesters marched on New Year’s Day in a mass rally that lasted only 20 minutes before the police fired tear gas to break it up. Since then, protesters such as “Wallace,” the 19 year-old student you meet in our episode, have stepped back as the city grapples with the possibility of a coronavirus outbreak. Still, protesters continue to clash with the police, and protesters have been expressing their discontent about the government’s handling of the potential health crisis. A new hospital workers union that formed out of the protest movement went on strike, demanding that Hong Kong’s leaders do more to contain the coronavirus, including a ban on all entries from mainland China.President Xi Jinping of China called for stability in Hong Kong during his New Year’s address. He has since come under new public scrutiny over the government’s response to the coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, another crisis that has threatened the country’s stability.Carrie Lam, the chief executive of Hong Kong, is again the target of a great deal of public anger, this time over the government’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak elsewhere in mainland China. Residents are upset over a shortage of protective face masks in Hong Kong, and Mrs. Lam’s reluctance to implement stricter controls on travel from mainland China.Behind-the-scenes commentary from “The Weekly.”Our director of photography Victor Tadashi Suarez filmed street protests last December, when hundreds of thousands of people came out to march in support of the pro-democracy movement after the siege of Poly U and the district council elections the month before.Protesters built a makeshift memorial in the Hong Kong parking garage where Alex Chow, a student protester, fell to his death last November when police officers clashed with protesters. Chow’s death galvanized the protest movement and helped set off the wave of demonstrations that led to the occupation of PolyU.Student protesters used pseudonyms and hid their faces behind masks to avoid being identified by the police and charged with rioting, which carries a punishment of up to 10 years in prison. One of the front line protesters at PolyU who goes by the initial “N” agreed to speak to “The Weekly” about his role in the protests only if we agreed to maintain his anonymity. He said he escaped the siege by rappelling off a campus bridge and fleeing on the back of a motorcycle. Protesters raise five fingers to represent their demands, including the withdrawal of the extradition bill, which the city’s chief executive said last September that she would scrap. After the government crackdown on the initial demonstrations, protesters called for broader political reforms – “five demands, not one less,” according to their rallying cry – including an independent investigation into police brutality and amnesty for protesters.What started as peaceful protests against an unpopular extradition bill escalated into more than six months of increasingly violent clashes between Hong Kong protesters and the police trying to assert control.Schools and universities had become flash points of the protest movement.The use of force, sometimes deadly, led to widespread calls for political reforms and greater oversight and accountability of the police. Citizens who couldn’t rely on the authorities to keep them safe set up their own networks to monitor police brutality.Though the Beijing-backed leader of Hong Kong withdrew the extradition bill that had set off the initial protests, it was not enough to quell the mounting movement for broader political reforms and police accountability.The clashes between police and protesters at PolyU were a new level of violence in a protest movement that had started peacefully. As police officers swept through the campus in November, students were forced to escape what The Times described as a montage of urban warfare and mayhem however they could.President Xi Jinping of China has come under criticism for Beijing’s response to the protests, with even some in the Chinese government quietly raising questions about Xi’s imperious style and authoritarian concentration of power.