Two American Soldiers Killed in Shootout With Afghan Forces
By Mujib MashalKABUL, Afghanistan — A shootout between Afghan and American soldiers during joint operations in eastern Afghanistan on Saturday resulted in deaths on both sides, with two Americans killed, officials said.A spokesman for the United States military in Afghanistan, Col. Sonny Leggett, said current reports indicated that “an individual in an Afghan uniform opened fire on the combined U.S. and Afghan force with a machine gun.”Six other American service members were wounded, Colonel Leggett said in a statement early Sunday. He said an investigation was underway and that the motive for the attack was unclear. The two soldiers killed, part of the Seventh Special Forces Group, were Staff Sgt. Javier J. Gutierrez, 28, of San Antonio and Staff Sgt. Antonio R. Rodriguez, 28, of Las Cruces, N.M., according to a Pentagon statement released Sunday.Other details of the incident in Nangarhar Province, where American Special Forces were helping Afghan commandos and the Afghan Army clear an area threatened by the Taliban, were scarce. It was not clear whether the firefight was the work of Taliban infiltrators, a major concern in the past.Afghanistan’s Defense Ministry said in a statement on Sunday that one Afghan soldier was also killed and three others wounded when “a man wearing military uniform” opened fire. The ministry said the country’s army chief, Gen. Bismillah Waziri, had traveled to Nangarhar to investigate the shooting.Earlier, three Afghan officials had said that two to six Afghan soldiers were also killed. In the first hours after the firefight, those officials said that five or six Americans were killed, and a United States military official said there were at least six American casualties, without specifying how many of those were fatalities.“Afghan commandos and U.S. forces were visiting an Afghan army base for an operation. After initial greetings, one of the commandos opened fire with a machine gun,” said Ajmal Omar, deputy head of the Nangarhar provincial council. “There was fear of a second shooter also, so they disarmed everyone at night.”Both the Taliban as well as the Islamic State branch in Afghanistan have had a foothold in Nangarhar Province. In Sherzad district, where the shootout took place, the joint operation had pushed the Taliban from around the main highway and was continuing to clear villages.Insider attacks by Afghan forces on Americans, known as “green on blue,” were so frequent during one stage of the war that American commanders feared the resulting mistrust could derail their mission.In recent years, the number of such attacks has fallen as the American presence has declined and the United States has taken more of a supporting role, with Afghan forces leading the fight. Nonetheless, Gen. Austin S. Miller, the top American and NATO commander in the country, barely survived a shooting by a Taliban infiltrator in an Afghan military uniform last year. A top Afghan general walking next to him was killed.The shooting comes in a delicate time in the war, as American negotiators have been locked in weeks of talks with the Taliban to finalize a peace deal.If a Taliban hand is seen in the shooting, it is sure to complicate those talks, which officials and diplomats suggested on Saturday had reached a promising stage.Last September, President Trump called off talks with the Taliban, citing a car-bombing in Kabul that had killed an American soldier as well nearly a dozen Afghans. It took months of trust building, including a prisoner swap, to get the two sides to return to the negotiating table in the hopes of finalizing a deal that could end America’s longest war.If an Afghan soldier led the attack on American forces, that could jeopardize the already strained diplomacy between Washington and Kabul. Mr. Trump has long wanted to end the United States military role in the 19-year war in Afghanistan, including withdrawing forces faster than some of his commanders recommend.The attack on Saturday could provide a new reason for him to do so.