An Outbreak of Racist Sentiment as Coronavirus Reaches Australia 
A newspaper front page called it a “Chinese virus.” Fake posts have warned people to avoid Chinese products. As the outbreak spreads, some worry about xenophobia.By Isabella KwaiThe Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau. Sign up to get it by email. This week’s issue is written by Isabella Kwai, a reporter with the Australia bureau.Recently, when Andy Miao takes the train to work in Sydney, he has noticed other people’s disapproving looks if he does not wear a face mask. Although he does not have the coronavirus, Mr. Miao, who is of Chinese heritage and grew up in Australia, knows it’s because of one reason: his ethnicity.“It makes people like me who are very, very Australian feel like outsiders,” said Mr. Miao, 24, who returned from a trip to China earlier this month and has since seen jokes degrading Chinese people. “It’s definitely invoking a lot of past racial stereotypes.”But as the World Health Organization declared a global health emergency after the virus spread to countries including Australia, he is worried about an outbreak of misinformation, panic and xenophobia.The virus has killed more than 200 people, with nearly 10,000 cases reported, though in Australia there are just a handful of cases, and health officials have said that the risk of catching it for many Australians is low.Still, universities have delayed exams, face masks — used only weeks ago against bush-fire smoke — are a common sight, and the government plans to evacuate Australians from the epicenter of the outbreak in China.Other responses here in Australia, where the relationship with China is contentious, have taken a more xenophobic bent. Some far-right lawmakers polled their followers, asking if Australians should ban Chinese people temporarily from the country. A newspaper in Victoria, The Herald Sun, called the coronavirus a “Chinese Virus” on its front page, prompting over 40,000 people to sign a petition demanding an apology. On social media, fake announcements are warning people away from Chinese-populated areas, and memes are making light of early reports that the virus jumped from wild animals to humans.“Racism feeds on fear and anxiety,” said Tim Soutphommasane, a former race-discrimination commissioner and now a professor at the University of Sydney. While the virus originated in China, “viral diseases don’t have ethnic, racial or national characteristics,” he said, adding that the misinformation was “alarming.”On Wednesday, the government said that it planned to evacuate Australians citizens from the province to Christmas Island, an Australian territory 2,000 miles away from the mainland, to be quarantined for 14 days.But many questioned the implications of using Christmas Island, where refugees and asylum seekers have been held, instead of military bases on the mainland. It was not an “appropriate” place to quarantine people, Dr. Tony Bartone, president of the Australian Medical Association, said in a television news interview. Faced with the decision, many Australians are opting to stay behind in lockdown.Some of the rhetoric has been reminiscent of a time when Chinese people were purposely excluded from the country. “You could read a similar article in the goldfields in 1860s Victoria,” said Jon Piccini, a lecturer in history at the Australian Catholic University.As scientists race to develop a vaccine, the virus is likely to continue to spread. Many wonder if it will further perpetuate stereotypes — the same ones that once prompted Australia to ban nonwhites from calling the country home.Mr. Miao said he did not blame people for being ignorant, though he added, “I don’t think it’s very fair.”Have you noticed or been affected by the fear around the coronavirus? Write to me at nytaustralia@nytimes.com. You can read more of our coverage here, or follow our correspondent Chris Buckley, who is reporting from Wuhan, on Twitter.Now, on to stories from the week.Michelle Elias contributed reporting.These Are the 3 American Firefighters Who Died in the Australia Plane Crash: The three men were all former service members who had traveled to Australia to battle the bush fires charring the country. Round of Upsets at Australian Open as 6 of Top 10 Women’s Seeds Lose: Pliskova, Svitolina and Bencic joined Osaka, Serena Williams and Wozniacki among the high-profile casualties in a previously placid tournamentSofia Kenin Emerges as a Fierce Counterpuncher Against Coco Gauff: Reaching her first Grand Slam singles quarterfinal had the No. 14 seed in tears.As Coronavirus Spreads, So Does Anti-Chinese Sentiment: Fears of the outbreak have fueled xenophobia as a wave of panic spreads, sometimes outstripping practical concerns.Novak Djokovic Outlasts Roger Federer to Stay Dominant in Australia: Djokovic prevailed in straight sets, extending his lead in head-to-head matches with Federer, to earn a place in the Australian Open final.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Can the Grammys Be Trusted? Younger artists have been suspicious of the music industry’s “biggest night” for years. New allegations of misconduct at the Recording Academy seem to confirm the worst.What to Know About Trump’s Middle East Plan: The proposal, three years in the making, favored Israeli priorities and was conceived without Palestinian input. Here are the main points and some of the most contested elements.Weinstein Accuser Says He Told Her, ‘This Is How the Industry Works’: Dawn Dunning, one of two women who testified against Harvey Weinstein, said he sexually assaulted her in the early 2000sCoronavirus Outbreak Tests World’s Dependence on China: As British Airways cancels flights and automakers close factories, businesses consider how to cope without the country’s vast factories and thriving consumer culture.Last week, I wrote about the experience of learning to swim as an adult and asked you to share your places of refuge in nature. “I go to the Seaview Dunes, which is a remote area on the Pacific Coast in South-West Washington, just north of the mouth of the Columbia River. One hundred miles from Portland, and there’s a lot of real — but ocean-less — forest in between.Why all the way to the dunes? If you go into the dunes, there are just no people in there. It’s quiet, except for the Pacific Ocean. The sound of the ocean is there all the time, day and night. The ocean never sleeps. I walk to the water. The water runs to meet you. You can touch it. It’s thousands of miles to the next shore. Sometimes, at night, the stars come down to the horizon almost all the way around. But I never go in the water there either. Just back into the dunes.”— Fred CannEnjoying the Australia Letter? Sign up here or forward to a friend.