Remote Learning is Nothing New to Outback Families
Very few people know so much about educating children remotely — but my Aunt Pat is an exception. She raised eight kids on a cattle station in Australia’s remote Northern Territory.By Besha RodellThe Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau. Sign up to get it by email. This week’s issue is written by Besha Rodell, a columnist with the Australia bureau.When I was 13, my father, brother and I took the long trip from Melbourne to visit my aunt Pat and her family in the Northern Territory. We traveled by car and train, allowing us to truly grasp the size of Australia. And yet, nothing prepared me for the vastness of the cattle station where my aunt and her family lived.At around a million and a quarter acres, their farm was larger than Rhode Island. They were a three-hour drive from the nearest town and a seven hour drive from Darwin, the nearest major city.Pat raised eight children on the station. Their schooling — from kindergarten through high school — was done remotely, at first via correspondence with a school in Adelaide, and then via two way radio when the School of the Air became available to them.(The New York Times wrote a story about these types of schools in the Northern Territory in 1997, well after Pat’s youngest child graduated.)It was Pat I thought of this week when my own son’s school sent an email detailing plans for distance learning during term two, starting next week, as part of a statewide move on the part of Victoria to slow the spread of coronavirus.Very few people know so much about educating children remotely — but Pat is a national exception. After raising her own children, Pat became an educator in remote communities and co-founded the Katherine branch of the Isolated Children’s Parents Association. Her work has earned her numerous accolades, including the Order of Australia and a nomination for Senior Australian of the Year in 2019.Now her expertise in demand once again. Both the Australia Day Council and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation have recently contacted her in the hope she might provide encouragement to parents who are anxious about their children’s education in a time when distance learning may be the best option.“There is a lot of unwarranted panic about this,” Pat told me this week by phone from her home in Katherine. “This is not going to affect the intelligence of your children one iota.”She points out that distance learning has been in place, and been successful, all around the world and for many years. “People think this is the first and only time this has ever been done,” she said.The Times has plenty of advice for parents dealing with children learning at home, along with a report on overburdened mothers during the pandemic, and good coverage of what it meant when New York City schools moved to remote learning.My own anxieties about remote learning for my teenage son have more to do with the burden of policing his time, just one more thing in a long list of chores and responsibilities I spend time nagging him about. Despite that, I know that he’ll be OK in part because he has parents who are concerned in the first place.“Distance learning only works when parents are at least somewhat involved,” Pat told me.For children in negative home environments, school can be a welcome respite. Both Pat and I worry far more about those kids than children like my own, who mostly have to deal with anxious, supportive nagging.And yet for all of us who took for granted that school would be a constant, the cancellation of classes — with no clear end in sight — brings challenges both educational and domestic.What parts of parenting have been most difficult for you during coronavirus isolation? Let us know at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Here are the week’s stories:Cardinal Pell’s Acquittal Was as Opaque as His Sexual Abuse Trial. Critics argue that Australia’s courts exhibited a penchant for secrecy and insular decision-making that resembled the Roman Catholic Church’s flawed response to sexual abuse within its ranks.George Pell Freed After Australian Court Overturns Sex Abuse Conviction. The cardinal was the highest-ranking Roman Catholic leader ever found guilty of sexually abusing children.Great Barrier Reef Is Bleaching Again. It’s Getting More Widespread. New data shows example after example of overheating and damage along the 1,500-mile natural wonder.Easter Bunny and Tooth Fairy Deemed ‘Essential Workers’ in New Zealand. Jacinda Ardern, the country’s prime minister, made the announcement on Monday.The Weirdly Enduring Appeal of Weird Al Yankovic. National economies collapse; species go extinct; political movements rise and fizzle. But — somehow, for some reason — Weird Al keeps rocking.In Scramble for Coronavirus Supplies, Rich Countries Push Poor Aside. Developing nations in Latin America and Africa cannot find enough materials and equipment to test for coronavirus, partly because the United States and Europe are outspending them.Our Best Easter Recipes. Here’s what to cook when you’ve had your fill of chocolate bunnies.More Coronavirus Vaccines and Treatments Move Toward Human Trials. Just three months after the start of the coronavirus pandemic, several biotech companies are beginning trials of promising vaccines and treatments.Last week, we wrote about seeking connection in a time of social distancing, and asked how you were staying connected. Here’s one reader’s response:My neighbors and I are having a ‘Pandemic on the Patio — Pyrmont Covid Cocktail Hour’ every Friday. We meet on our respective balconies to take in our beautiful view of Sydney Harbour and ‘the bridge’ and share an hour and half of ‘bubbles and babble.’ It is joyful and has also proven to put a smile on the faces of anyone who passes by!— Kim Chandler McDonaldEnjoying the Australia Letter? Sign up here or forward to a friend.