Outbreak in Northern Italy Poses National Challenge
The latest in our coverage of the coronavirus can be found here.Asian markets signaled a calmer outlook after Monday’s sharp drop in stocks.Japan’s Nikkei 225 index was down 3 percent on Tuesday morning after missing Monday’s stock rout, as markets there were closed for a holiday. But shares in China and Hong Kong were down only modestly in early trading, and shares in South Korea rose. Hong Kong was down less than 0.2 percent, and stocks in Shanghai were down less than 1 percent.As fears rose on Monday that the outbreak could spread further into Asia and Europe, investors sold stocks at a furious pace.[Update: Nigeria records Sub-Saharan Africa’s first case of coronavirus.]The S&P 500 index, which had reached a record high just last week, fell 3.4 percent on Monday, its worst single-day performance in more than two years. Stocks fell enough to wipe out all of the index’s gains for 2020. Earlier in the day, European markets recorded their worst day since 2016, and major benchmarks in Asia also closed down.Airline and technology stocks were particularly hard hit by Monday’s decline. Delta Air Lines fell 6.3 percent and American Airlines was down 8.5 percent, while shares of Apple fell 4.8 percent. The tech-heavy Nasdaq composite index dropped 3.7 percent.Analysts have issued new warnings in recent days that the outbreak could drag down economies around the globe.Economists at JPMorgan Chase wrote that they expected global growth to slow to a 1 percent annual pace in the first quarter, which would be the weakest quarter of the economic expansion that began after the deep recession that started in 2008. In the United States, the general estimate for first-quarter domestic growth has slipped.“The risks are clearly skewed to the downside until the outbreak is contained,” economists at Goldman Sachs wrote.American travelers were advised Monday to avoid nonessential travel to South Korea because of the rapid spread of the coronavirus there, as the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention raised the travel warning to level three, its highest level.“There is a widespread, ongoing outbreak of respiratory illness caused by a novel (new) coronavirus that can be spread from person to person,” the CDC said in an advisory. “Older adults and people with chronic medical conditions may be at risk of severe disease.”The CDC also warned that “there is limited access to adequate medical care in affected areas.”The warning came as South Korea reported Tuesday that the number of cases in the country had risen by 60 to 893 overall. The majority of the cases have been centered in the area in and around Daegu, South Korea’s fourth-largest city, 180 miles southeast of Seoul. And roughly half the patients in the country are members of the Shincheonji religious group, which has a large following in the city.The higher threat level a day after President Moon Jae-in on Sunday put the country on the highest possible alert in its fight against the coronavirus.Milan’s normally bustling streets, stores and restaurants are eerily empty. In Italy’s commercial hub, major companies, from banks to the fashion house Giorgio Armani, are telling employees to work at home.The doors are closed to visitors at the famed opera house La Scala, the Duomo Cathedral — even the bars.“Everything seems to have completely stopped,” said Leonardo Miri, 48, an IBM employee. He had been turned away from the company’s offices. No one was there.Europe’s largest outbreak of the new coronavirus outbreak has erupted in Lombardy, the northern region that includes Milan. About half of the country’s 229 cases are in Lombardy. The government said at least 26 patients were in intensive care, and has reported six deaths.The virus represents perhaps the greatest challenge to Europe since the 2015 migration crisis. It could test the principle of open borders and the vaunted but strained European public health systems.For Italy, Europe’s slowest-growing economy, the vulnerabilities are clear.Milan represents 10 percent of the Italian economy; Lombardy, more than 20 percent. Milan’s stock market plunged by more than 5 percent on Monday over fears of what may be in store.Flights from China are blocked and the closure of Chinese factories has disrupted Italian supply chains. Marco Barbieri, the leader of Confcommercio Milan, a business alliance, estimated profits to be off by 20 percent for companies dependent on China.Eleven towns in Lombardy are on lockdown, and Italy’s government has promised them help similar to that given after earthquakes, like the suspension of tax payments.Italy’s neighbors have not closed their borders, but the country fears being ostracized and carved into islands of quarantine. The southern region of Basilicata has announced a quarantine on northerners.The island nation of Mauritius, in the Indian Ocean, gave passengers on an Alitalia flight from Rome a choice of quarantine or immediate return. They flew back to Italy.A planned three-week shoot in Italy for Tom Cruise’s new “Mission: Impossible” film has been postponed because of the outbreak, Paramount Pictures announced on Monday. Filming had been scheduled to start on Monday in Venice.Public health experts warn that Iran, whose borders are crossed each year by millions of religious pilgrims, migrant workers and others, is one of the biggest causes for worry in what threatens to become a global epidemic.Iran said on Monday that it had 12 coronavirus deaths — more than any country but China — but has acknowledged only 61 cases. By contrast, South Korea has reported fewer deaths, just seven, but more than 800 infections.Many Iranians suspect the government is hiding the true extent of the outbreak. If the virus kills about 2 percent of known victims, as Chinese doctors have reported, then the number of deaths can be multiplied by 50 to get a rough case estimate, which would mean Iran has 600 cases, or 10 times the official figure.Cases in Iraq, Afghanistan, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Lebanon, United Arab Emirates and Canada have been traced to Iran.Ahmad Amiri Farahani, a lawmaker representing Qom, a popular pilgrimage destination where hundreds of Chinese students are currently studying, claimed on Monday that the virus had killed at least 50 there.“Every day 10 people are dying in Qom,” he said in Parliament, demanding a quarantine on his city.Health ministry officials vehemently disputed his claims. “I will resign if the numbers are even half or a quarter of this,” said Iraj Harirchi, an adviser to the health minister.The virus has infected more than 5,568,600 people in at least 177 countries.The head of a medical school in Qom said the ministry had ordered the city not to release its own figures.Qom is visited annually by hundreds of thousands of Shiite Muslims, who can take infections home with them. Many come from countries like Syria, Afghanistan and Yemen that have been devastated by war, with little capacity to fight an epidemic.Pakistan’s 596-mile frontier with Iran, with few border controls, poses particular challenges in controlling the spread of the virus.The outbreak in Iran feeds the skepticism of Iranians who are already inclined to disbelieve government pronouncements. Many have ignored official urging not to visit hospitals unless they are seriously ill, crowding emergency rooms for testing.Tehran has announced a weeklong closure of schools, universities and cultural centers across 14 provinces in an effort to curb the outbreak. Long lines have formed outside pharmacies, and there is a shortage of masks and disinfectants.China appears to be getting the new coronavirus under control, but with infections spreading rapidly in South Korea, Iran and Italy, the world is not prepared for a major outbreak, World Health Organization officials said on Monday.A W.H.O. mission to China has said that the daily tally of new cases there peaked and then plateaued between Jan. 23 and Feb. 2, and has steadily declined since.“We’re encouraged by the continued decline in cases in China,” said Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the organization’s director general.On Monday, China recorded 508 more confirmed cases of coronavirus infection and another 71 deaths from the virus. The total number of confirmed infections across China is now 77,658 and officially 2,663 people in China have died from the coronavirus.The rise in the number of deaths reported on Tuesday — an increase of under 3 percent — was a marked decrease from the new cases reported daily over the last few weeks, when new fatalities regularly reached into the hundreds.The W.H.O. team credited lockdown measures China imposed in late January for averting a faster spread from Wuhan, the city at the center of the epidemic. China sealed off cities, shut down businesses and schools, and ordered people to avoid mass gatherings.“China has taken one of the most ancient strategies for infectious disease control and rolled out probably the most ambitious and I would say agile and aggressive disease-contagion efforts in history,” said Bruce Aylward, a Canadian doctor and epidemiologist who led the W.H.O. mission to China.But some experts question whether the epidemic is truly waning in China, which changed the way it counted cases earlier this month, then changed it back again. Some infected people have been unable or reluctant to receive medical care, and there is a shortage of viral testing kits, which may mean that cases go undetected.The infection has been fatal in 2 to 4 percent of cases within Wuhan, but in less than 1 percent elsewhere, the W.H.O. said.The organization has declared the epidemic a public health emergency, but Dr. Tedros said it has not reached the level of a pandemic — yet.“For the moment, we are not witnessing the uncontained global spread of this virus and we are not witnessing large-scale severe disease or deaths,” he said. “Does this virus have pandemic potential? Absolutely it has.”The number of infected people in the United States has reached 53, up from 34 on Friday, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.All the new U.S. cases reported Monday occurred among people who were flown back from Asia by the State Department, the C.D.C. reported. Nearly all involve former passengers on the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked in Japan. They are in quarantine on military bases in California and Texas.Twelve of the total American cases occurred in people who had traveled to China, returned on their own and became ill after arriving back in the United States. Two additional cases involve people who came into immediate contact with some of those dozen people.Ten of those 14 people are either isolating at home (under supervision from health officials) or being treated at hospitals. The remaining four have recovered, been through quarantine periods and are back out in the world.Shares of the American pharmaceutical giant Gilead gained about 5 percent on Monday, after a senior World Health Official identified one of its antiviral drugs, remdesivir, as a potential treatment for the coronavirus Covid-19.“There is only one drug right now that we think may have real efficacy and that’s remdesivir,” said Dr. Bruce Aylward, a Canadian doctor and an epidemiologist who is leading the W.H.O. mission to China. He spoke at a news conference in Beijing.Doctors and drug manufacturers are scrambling to find treatments for the virus, but so far, none have been approved, including remdesivir.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Gilead’s drug is an antiviral medicine that is administered intravenously. It has been tested on only a small number of patients with coronavirus, according to the company’s website. But there has been excitement about it since doctors in Washington State administered the drug to the first U.S. coronavirus patient, and his symptoms improved the next day.Two clinical trials of the drug are enrolling participants in China. One focuses on patients with severe cases, the other on those with moderate cases, according to Ryan McKeel, a Gilead spokesman.Mr. McKeel said that the company was donating doses of the drug for the trials, and that results were expected in April.China’s government and businesses are sending out chartered trains, buses and airplanes to bring migrant workers back to their jobs, according to state media, as the government tries to get the world’s second-largest economy humming again.China Eastern Airlines last week began offering chartered flights to transport people back to workplaces in parts of the country they had been unable to reach after travel restrictions were imposed. In one day, it received requests from nearly 60 companies.It sent its first chartered plane on Monday to bring 160 workers from Henan Province in central China to the industrial and commercial center of Shanghai.Also last week, the state rail service began offering special trains that so far have taken more than 30,000 workers back to work in Guangdong, Zhejiang and Jiangsu Provinces, as well as cities like Shanghai. Some companies have dispatched buses to take employees back to factories.transcriptVoices like these from Chinese citizens are very rare. People who are willing to speak out about the government’s attempts to control news about the deadly coronavirus. They asked to remain anonymous, because what they’re doing could put them and their families at great risk. But these people are part of a new wave of Chinese citizens, fighting to get the message out in a country that aggressively censors information. Accounts or messages like these calling for free speech are quickly scrubbed from the internet. Or videos like this, showing people frustrated about life under lockdown. [clanging] Posted online one day, but gone the next. But the crisis over the coronavirus is changing the landscape, for now at least. Everyday citizens are preserving and reposting information the government doesn’t want out there. Experts say this kind of digital resistance is happening at a scale they’ve never seen before. Social media networks like YouTube, Facebook and Twitter are blocked in China. But internet savvy people use techniques that allow them to repost censored content to these platforms, while staying under the radar of authorities. They’re creating a visual archive by preserving videos like this one, showing overwhelmed hospitals. [screaming] And they’re reposting people’s personal stories. Some are also turning to less obvious platforms, including GitHub, which is a site mostly used by coders. Another taboo Chinese citizens are pushing back on? They’re making open and widespread calls for freedom of speech. These were triggered by the death of Dr. Li Wenliang. He was an early whistleblower who warned about the virus, and was punished by officials for speaking out. He died in early February from the coronavirus. Right after his death, the hashtag “I want freedom of speech” started to trend on Weibo, a Chinese social media site. Then, it was quickly censored by the government. Dr. Li’s become an icon in the online fight for freedom of speech between censors and citizens. So, who’s winning? For now, citizens are staying a step ahead of the authorities. But a renewed government crackdown could test the strength of this digital resistance.Workers will have to take a health check before they can make the trip. They will use special tunnels to check in. The trains and buses are nonstop directly to the destinations.Much of China’s work force of more than 700 million people had gone home to celebrate the Lunar New Year when the coronavirus outbreak began, and then were unable to return to the cities where they worked.Cong Liang, an official with the National Development and Reform Commission, said on Monday at a news conference that a large percentage of major manufacturing businesses are resuming production. In Zhejiang Province, 90 percent of industrial enterprises with annual revenue of $2.8 million or more have resumed operation. Many of those businesses are likely at less than full production, however.South Korea on Monday reported 231 more cases of the virus that causes the disease Covid-19, bringing the nation’s total to 833 cases and seven deaths. On Tuesday, South Korea reported 60 more cases, bringing its total to 893.President Moon Jae-in put South Korea on the highest possible alert on Sunday, a move that empowers the government to lock down cities and take other sweeping measures to contain the outbreak.“The coming few days will be a critical time for us,” Mr. Moon said at an emergency meeting of government officials to discuss the outbreak. “The central government, local governments, health officials and medical personnel and the entire people must wage an all-out, concerted response to the problem.”Many of South Korea’s coronavirus cases are in the southeastern city of Daegu, which has essentially been placed under a state of emergency, though people are still free to enter and leave the city.More than half of the people confirmed to have been infected are either members of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus, a secretive religious sect with a strong presence in Daegu, or their relatives or other contacts.On Monday, the United States Forces Korea confirmed that a dependent of a member of the armed forces living in Daegu was among those who had tested positive for the virus.The U.S. and South Korean military are considering scaling back command post training because of heightened concerns about the coronavirus, the defense ministers of both countries said on Monday.China’s top legislative body postponed the annual full meeting of the National People’s Congress and ordered a temporary ban on the consumption of all wildlife until officials draft new laws regulating the trade, which has been identified as a probable source of the new coronavirus.The Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress, China’s parliamentary body, had earlier signaled the delay in the annual National People’s conference meeting, reflecting how the epidemic has upended the Communist Party’s carefully choreographed and regimented political events.The committee did not announce a new date for the session, which is held with pomp and pageantry in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing.The decision on the consumption of wildlife reflected a groundswell of public sentiment against the custom, practiced in some parts of the country, of eating various types of wildlife, including bats, civets and hedgehogs.Although the exact course of the coronavirus’ path is still under investigation, health officials and scientists say it spread outward from a wholesale market in Wuhan where vendors sold live wild animals in crowded stalls in close quarters with meat, vegetables and other products.Chinese law currently allows people to raise or hunt 54 different animals, birds, reptiles and insects. In a statement, the committee indicated that it would look to strengthen the existing laws, as well as the punishments for violations, but that it would take some time to do so. The trafficking of endangered or threatened wildlife, such as pangolins, is already prohibited.“Since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus epidemic, the outstanding problems of excessive consumption of wild animals and its huge hidden dangers to public health safety have attracted wide attention from all walks of life,” the committee’s statement said, “but a comprehensive revision of the wildlife protection law requires a process.”Afghanistan declared a state of emergency in the western province of Herat on Monday after health officials confirmed the country’s first case of coronavirus in the region, which shares a porous border with Iran.“The case was identified right away and measures taken — the patient’s health is under control and there isn’t concern about the individual’s health at this point,” Health Minister Ferozuddin Feroz said.Mr. Feroz said it was estimated that more than 1,000 Afghans from Herat had traveled over the past few weeks to Qom, Iran, a place of pilgrimage for Shiite Muslims because of its many shrines. He said officials were identifying those people for more screening and tests. Five were staying in an 80-bed quarantine center that had been established in Herat, he added.The patient confirmed to have the virus was among five Afghan citizens who had been in Qom, the city where the first cases and fatalities were reported in Iran. They transited through Dubai before returning to Herat, Mr. Feroz said.Afghanistan’s National Security Council said on Sunday that the country had suspended air and ground transport to Iran and asked for consular services to be limited to “essential humanitarian needs.” Usually, huge numbers of Afghan migrant workers travel back and forth across the border.Beyond that, the border between the two countries is punctured by extensive smuggling routes, leaving concern even after official measures to limit formal movement.