When Pet Owners Fall Ill With Coronavirus, What Happens Next?
By Raphael MinderMADRID — The coronavirus strikes. The patient — at home, sometimes alone — becomes desperately ill. The ambulance finally arrives to take the person away.Then, a second team, clad in hazmat gear, follows to rescue a household member abandoned in the chaos and suddenly in need of a new caregiver: the patient’s pet.The teams, from the Madrid animal shelter El Refugio, end up placing the pets in foster homes with people who will care for them temporarily while Spain’s strict lockdown is in place and so much is in flux.Thousands of animals in Spain have been left behind amid one of the world’s largest and deadliest coronavirus outbreaks — something that has been mirrored around the world, from Wuhan, China, where the pandemic originated, to Israel and India. At the same time, the demand to adopt dogs and cats has surged during the lockdown.“The great news is that there are far more people who have now offered to look after a pet than the number we have had to rescue,” said Nacho Paunero, the president of El Refugio.But the intensity of the country’s outbreak is raising some ethical and practical questions for animal protection workers. They are concerned that the rush to adopt pets may not always be in the animals’ best interests and in some cases have started to put limits in place.Shelter administrators are wondering how committed the adoptive owners are to keeping their new pets — or whether they will then abandon them after the emergency passes. Because dog walking is one of the few activities exempt from Spain’s stringent lockdown, animal shelter workers worry that this drove up the demand for adoptions.Since March 14, the country has kept its 47 million residents under strict and closely monitored control, forbidding almost everyone — including all children — from taking even a short stroll outside the house.“If you’re in a hurry to adopt, I see that as a very bad signal, particularly as it’s clear there are people who want to adopt in order to have an excuse to walk the streets — which in turn means that these animals could be either returned to us or abandoned,” said Javier Rodellar, the president of Anerpa, an animal protection association.Mr. Rodellar said his group suspended all adoptions and limited even temporary placements to its circle of volunteers and supporters when Spain went into lockdown in mid-March. It has rejected at least 50 adoption requests since.Anerpa is sheltering all its animals for now, Mr. Rodellar said, a decision that is stretching its finances considerably. He acknowledged that Spain’s animal welfare associations were split over the issue, with some reasoning that any caregiver is better than none at all.Luz Vaillo, who runs a shelter in the city of Salamanca, said she expected many of the seven dogs adopted the day before Spain’s lockdown took effect to be returned but was confident that they would be well treated in the meantime.“It’s impossible to know what exactly motivates somebody, so we can only hope that nobody will abandon a dog again as soon as all movement restrictions are lifted,” Ms. Vaillo said.El Refugio is placing pets only in foster care for now.“I make a distinction between an adoption, which is forever, and the need to find a temporary emergency solution,” said Mr. Paunero, of El Refugio.In some cases, pet owners fell ill with shocking swiftness.“In the more dramatic cases, we have, sadly, had to pick up an animal from an apartment just after the emergency services had removed the corpse of its owner,” Mr. Paunero said.What happens next for the pets is often improvisation.While El Refugio deploys rescue missions in Madrid, the fates of other pets in Spain often hang on word of mouth: a neighbor asking around if somebody can help, an emergency worker trying to locate a relative. Typically, if the owner has a chance of recovery, the new arrangement is temporary.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.For Antonio Viñas, 46, hospitalized in Madrid, “it just all happened a bit too suddenly” to make contingency plans for his dog, Augustus, a white German Spitz with a cream-colored face. Augustus was placed informally in the home of nearby residents, as many emergency placements have been made in Spain.The neighbors, Ariel Framis, 15, and his mother, Alicia, had never met Mr. Viñas, but they agreed to take in Augustus after hearing from a friend that a dog in their neighborhood urgently needed care.Now, Ariel and his mother send daily updates to Mr. Viñas, sharing photos and stories about Augustus that “clearly bring some joy to his hospital bed,” Ms. Framis said.Ariel has benefited from taking care of Augustus, too.“We always thought about having a dog, but it didn’t really seem possible because we live in an apartment, my mum works and I’m normally either at school or at basketball training,” Ariel said. “But I’m now stuck at home, and I’m really enjoying playing with Augustus.”Mr. Viñas is grateful for the foster care, though he longs to be reunited with Augustus.Hospitalized in early April, Mr. Viñas hopes to be discharged within two or three weeks. When he is fit again and Spain’s lockdown is lifted, he said he would take Augustus for a long walk in the mountains outside Madrid.“The best way that I can think of celebrating my recovery,” Mr. Viñas said, “is to take Augustus to the Sierra.”