Bogotá’s Cacophony Is Hushed by Virus as Congested Streets Empty Out
In normal times, Colombia’s crowded capital reverberates with never-ending noise. But under quarantine, the city was overtaken by an extraordinary sound: silence.By Julie TurkewitzBOGOTÁ, Colombia — The typical Bogotá morning starts at dawn and quickly becomes an eight million-person roar.There is the whoosh-squoosh of the juice vendor squashing her oranges on the corner, the growl of a hundred motorbikes, the wheeze of a thousand lumbering buses.There are the salesmen barking on their bullhorns, the protesters shouting in the plaza, the drum squads and the never-ending honks and squeals of what has been called the most congested city in the world.But after Mayor Claudia López declared Colombia’s sprawling, mountainous, mural-covered capital under quarantine and ordered people to stay at home, something else arrived.Silence.Or if total silence eluded certain corners, there was at least a new soundscape, a refitted rhythm for an extraordinary time.Instead of the thunder of motors climbing into the hills, there was the scrape of plates in the neighbor’s kitchen. The clink of wind chimes. The gush of a sink. The occasional ominous scream of an ambulance. Two people making love. Tina Turner on someone’s speakers, with amateur vocal accompaniment.“What’s love got to do with it?”Outside, at night, leaves crinkled under the feet of a few solitary dog walkers. Footsteps echoed like boots after a snowfall.Like the rest of Latin America, people here for weeks had been watching at a relatively safe distance as the rest of the world convulsed amid the onslaught of the new coronavirus.But now the region is bracing to feel its full impact. Bogotá’s lockdown began on March 20. Colombia on Sunday said it had more than 700 cases, with at least 10 deaths. Cases in neighboring Ecuador now near 2,000, and in Brazil, top 4,000.With millions of people in Latin America working in the informal sector, with no guaranteed wages and no benefits, there is widespread acknowledgment that many here do not have the means to survive weeks under lockdown. And there is deep fear across the region that the associated economic and social disruption could far outlast the virus itself.As residents of Bogotá tried to digest that reality, the hush unnerved some of its more noise-hardened citizens, the strange emptiness a suggestion that something sinister was on its way.“Makes me anxious,” said Juan León, 50, a gas station attendant coming off a night shift at the pumps. He’d spent the overnight hours alone, fearful of a robbery.Others found comfort in the quiet, a welcome stillness ahead of a coming attack.“Silence in itself does not exist,” said Enmanuel Rivero, 25, a violinist in a black jacket standing with his dog, Dante, in the La Soledad neighborhood on a recent night.Mr. Rivero pointed out the rustle of the trees, “the soft whisper of the breeze.”“You hear the call of nature,” he said. The city’s lowered voice “calms me,” he added. “It reminds me of my little hometown.”The next morning, La Soledad, a middle-class neighborhood split by a normally bustling strip of greenery, was so quiet you could hear the water rushing in a nearby river. A few people in white masks waited outside the locked gates of a supermarket, friendly but nervous.Above the store, a woman stood in the window of an apartment on the fourth floor, peering down at the near empty street.“We’ll hug each other again,” said a large sign hanging in her window.On the street, an enormous two-wheeled recycling cart, like a giant’s wheelbarrow, cut the quiet.Tika-tika-tika-tika went the wheels on the asphalt. Clunk-clunk went the wagon as it hit the ground.A small man emerged from behind the cart and introduced himself as Jorge Paez, 58, a trash collector.The quarantine had been problematic for Mr. Paez, who gathers cardboard and other items and sells them to a recycler. On a good day he brings in $3, buys some food and sleeps in a shelter.But when he went to sell his cardboard recently, the recycler was closed.He had no idea how he would continue to eat.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“I am at great risk because of my age, but I have to go out to make a living,” he said. He motioned to another older man on the street, shuffling along in worn clothes.“We are all at risk,” Mr. Paez said. “And we’re putting others at risk.”On another empty street, a male voice spilled onto the sidewalk from behind someone’s red door. It was Iván Duque, the president, on the television, trying to soothe the country.He was extending the quarantine to the whole nation, he said, until at least mid-April.He urged people to wash their hands “constantly,” and for now, to stop hugging their grandparents.“These pandemics,” he said gravely, “tend to grow exponentially.”Later, near dark, a hacking cough rippled through an empty park.Ack! Ack! Ack! Akchoo!“I’m good, thanks,” said the owner of the coughs, an artisan named Julio César, 60, who normally sells soap carvings in the street. “I’ve been sleeping on the street for days,” he hollered across the road, “because I have no money and no one is buying.”He coughed.“But I’m OK,” he said, coughing again. “I’m going to be OK.”The city’s silence turned out to be a fragile phenomenon.The next day, there was broad confusion over whether the citywide quarantine was still in place, and when exactly the countrywide quarantine would begin.Bogotá began to boom again.There were long lines outside grocery stores and banks, and some people crowded into buses, trying to get to work.And in the city center, at Plaza de Bolívar, home to the enormous, regal congressional building, a crowd formed, everyone packed together, some wearing masks, to express their fears about the coming days, and to demand help.