What You Need to Know About Trump’s European Travel Ban
By Megan SpeciaLONDON — President Trump’s announcement of sweeping restrictions on travel from much of Europe to the United States dropped like a hammer on Wednesday.He said they were an attempt to stem the spread of the coronavirus. But the announcement left Americans and Europeans alike confused about when the restrictions come into effect, how they will be enforced and whether they will have the intended effect of halting the spread of the coronavirus.[Update: Boris Johnson, U.K. Prime Minister, has the coronavirus.]Here’s what we know.After Mr. Trump addressed the nation from the Oval Office, leaving the impression that all of Europe would be subject to the travel restrictions, the government scrambled to clarify.Initially, officials said the restrictions applied only to people who are not U.S. citizens who in the past two weeks have been in European nations that are part of the Schengen Area — the 26 countries that generally allow free and open movement across their borders: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.But on Saturday, Mr. Trump said they would be extended to Britain and Ireland beginning on Monday. The measure also excludes nations like Croatia, Cyprus, Turkey and Ukraine.In his earlier address, Mr. Trump referred to a “foreign virus” and criticized European nations as having “failed to take the same precautions” as he had in limiting travel from China, where the outbreak began.Europe has not been a major source of known infections in the United States, but Italy has been hit hard, reporting more than 12,000 cases. France, Germany and Spain have each reported more than 2,000 cases.The White House said the rationale for limiting travel from the Schengen zone was because, combined, they have the most confirmed coronavirus cases outside China — 17,442 cases and 711 deaths as of Wednesday — and showed “high continuous growth in infection rates.”“The free flow of people between the Schengen Area countries makes the task of managing the spread of the virus difficult,” the White House said in a statement, adding that travel “threatens the security of our transportation system and infrastructure and the national security.”By midnight Friday, the new restrictions will be in full force.But they will not apply to anyone aboard a flight to the United States that left before that time.Hours after the announcement, it was still unclear how flights that operate regularly between Europe and the United States would be affected, and airlines were scrambling to create contingency plans.American Airlines said that customers holding U.S. passports or Green Cards attempting to re-enter the United States from Europe would be rebooked, if necessary, to one of the approved airports. But the carrier added that any other passengers who had traveled to one of the Schengen countries within the past two weeks would not be allowed to travel to the United States on its flights.Air France said it would announce on Thursday whether it would adjust flights as a result of the restrictions. But Norwegian Airlines, a low-cost carrier with several routes between Europe and the United States, said its flights would continue as normal in the short term.Not all foreign travelers will be subjected to the travel restrictions. The spouses, parents or siblings of American citizens or permanent residents, will be exempt, as will members of the U.S. military and their spouses and children.Permanent residents of the United States will not subjected to the restrictions. A full list of those who can still enter the United States can be found here.U.S. citizens who have traveled in the specified European nations will still be able to enter the United States. But the practicalities could become increasingly complicated.Mr. Trump noted in his address that American citizens who had traveled in the Schengen Area could enter the United States once they had been “appropriately screened.”Vice President Mike Pence said on the television show “Fox & Friends” on Thursday that Americans returning from Europe in the next 30 days would be “funneled through 13 airports” and asked to self-quarantine for 14 days. He did not specify which airports.Mr. Pence said the measures would remain in place for 30 days.The European Union, which seems to have been caught off guard, on Thursday slammed Mr. Trump’s decision.Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, and Charles Michel, the president of the European Council, said in a scathing joint statement that the decision had been made “unilaterally and without consultation.”It is unclear whether European officials will cooperate with the travel restrictions.Muriel Pénicaud, the French labor minister, sought to reassure the French public, but said that the restrictions would be a blow to the transportation and export sectors.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.She added, however: “It will harm the U.S., too. Trade goes both ways.”Jean-Baptiste Djebbari, France’s junior minister for transportation, said that he was not surprised by Mr. Trump’s decision but suggested that France had not received any warning.“I know the temperament of Donald Trump, who by the way maybe reacted a bit later than some other countries, most notably European countries, on the issue,” Mr. Djebbari told reporters in Paris after a meeting with representatives from France’s transportation and travel businesses.Travelers eager to get to the United States before the restrictions took effect described scenes of chaos and uncertainty at airports across Europe on Thursday.At Charles de Gaulle Airport near Paris, long lines began forming at dawn, some passengers resigned to waiting hours, with no guarantee of a ticket.A ticket agent for Delta Air Lines said that some panicked passengers had gone online in the hours after Mr. Trump’s announcement and spent tens of thousands of dollars for last-minute flights to the United States. They then tried to change them for cheaper tickets at the airport, without success.At the Barcelona Airport, Carlos Martinez, a 26-year-old from San Francisco, and his boyfriend struggled to find an affordable ticket home after canceling the second leg of their European trip.“We would like some clear direction from our government as to what is the protocol here,” Mr. Martinez said in a telephone interview.