Local and State Officials Unlock Sweeping Powers to Fight Coronavirus
By Michael LevensonIt might seem there is no more awesome power available to the government than a national emergency declaration like the one President Trump announced on Friday in response to the rapidly spreading coronavirus.But the governors, county executives and mayors across the country who have declared states of emergency in their own areas have actually unlocked even more sweeping powers, according to legal experts.While those powers vary by jurisdiction, they generally include the ability to impose curfews, order people and traffic off the street, mandate quarantines, ration goods, declare price controls, suspend alcohol consumption and limit public gatherings, according to Elizabeth Goitein, a director of the liberty and national security program at the New York University School of Law’s Brennan Center for Justice.“The state and local governments have extraordinarily broad powers to handle public health crises — much broader than the federal government has,” Ms. Goitein said. “The federal government has more money, but state and local officials have police powers, essentially their authority to maintain public health and safety.”At least 40 states and territories from Alaska to Florida have declared emergencies in response to the coronavirus, according to the National Governors Association. Mayors from San Francisco to Providence, R.I., have also invoked their emergency powers. Many have done so to limit public gatherings, restrict access to nursing homes, close schools and suspend out-of-state travel for government workers.Some have also noted that they could take more drastic action. Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York, for example, pointed out that the emergency declaration he issued this week allowed him to shut down public transit, ration supplies and close streets.“The state and local powers to deal with a public health crisis start to look like the federal government’s power during wartime,” Ms. Goitein said. “It starts to look like what we’ve seen in Italy and China.”The real limit on such emergency powers is more political than legal, she said, noting that mayors and governors must answer to voters for any draconian measures they might take.In the past, when local and state authorities have declared states of emergency, it was often in response to weather-related disasters like hurricanes and blizzards. In those cases, they frequently impose curfews, close streets or suspend parking rules.“The powers are all there and you choose on a menu the one that fits best,” said Richard B. Golden, a lawyer and former county attorney for Orange County, N.Y.He said the states of emergency that local officials have declared in response to the coronavirus allow them to impose stricter limits on public gatherings than a state-level declaration would. Some are also considering closing town halls and asking residents to conduct business via mail and over the internet, rather than in person.“They’re acting responsibly to try to figure out in a rather chaotic situation what might be done to protect their residents,” Mr. Golden said. “They’re trying to act in a way that’s reasoned.”The national emergency declaration issued by Mr. Trump on Friday was intended to release up to $50 billion in federal aid and waive regulations to help hospitals and doctors fight the virus.The declarations issued at the state and local level will arm authorities for actions that might be needed in their areas, said Juliette Kayyem, faculty chair of the Homeland Security Project at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government.Those steps might include quickly shifting resources from one area, like transportation, to another, like public health, or ordering a quarantine in a town hit hard by the virus.