Unexplained Coronavirus Cases in Three States Raise Specter of Spread
By Mike Baker, Sheri Fink, Thomas Fuller and Nicholas Bogel-BurroughsSEATTLE — Troubling new signs that the coronavirus is spreading in the United States emerged on Friday, as cases not explained by overseas travel or contact with a person known to be infected were reported in California, Oregon and Washington State.Officials from the three states announced that their testing had found new cases: a high school student from north of Seattle; an employee of an elementary school in Oregon, near Portland; and a woman in Santa Clara County, Calif., in the heart of Silicon Valley.Sixty-five cases of the virus have been reported in the United States, but until this week, all of the cases could be explained by overseas travel or contact with someone who had been ill. The three new cases on Friday, and a case earlier in the week, in California, were the first in the United States where the cause was mysterious and unknown — a sign, experts warned, that the virus, which has killed more than 2,800 people worldwide and sickened tens of thousands of others, might now be spreading in this country.“If we were worried yesterday, we are even more worried today,” said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. “Now we have to ask: How widely, really widely, is this virus out there?”As word emerged of the unexplained cases, local officials scrambled to trace everyone who had come in contact with those who were ill. California health officials said they were increasing testing. And in Washington State, officials suggested that people needed to prepare for the possibility of schools closing and businesses keeping workers home.“We’re going to be increasingly recommending that people try and avoid crowds and close contact with other people,” Dr. Jeff Duchin, health officer for Public Health Seattle & King County, said. “We may get to a point where we want to recommend canceling large public gatherings — social events, sporting events, entertainment — until we get over a hump of what might be a large outbreak.”In some of the new cases, officials described situations where those who were ill may have had contact with many people in recent days.The student in Washington State who tested positive for coronavirus, according to state officials, had visited two health clinics and gone to his school in Snohomish County, Henry M. Jackson High School, on Friday before the diagnosis, although he did not attend classes.Dr. Chris Spitters, health officer of the Snohomish Health District, said he suspected that the teenager probably got sick from someone with a mild form of the illness who did not seek care. “I think we’re going to find as time goes on that there’s more of that,” Dr. Spitters said.In Oregon, a state that had not reported any previous cases of coronavirus, officials said an employee of Forest Hills Elementary School in Lake Oswego appeared to have contracted the virus more than a week ago.Oregon health officials said their public health laboratory, which began testing samples on Friday, had detected the positive case; the sample will also be tested at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for confirmation, as will the new cases from Washington and California.In California, a woman from Santa Clara County with chronic health conditions who was hospitalized for a respiratory illness was reported on Friday to have tested positive for infection with the virus. Two days earlier, officials in Solano County, Calif., 90 minutes from Santa Clara County, had announced the first case in the nation with no clear ties to any previous case or overseas travel.In counties in and around each of the new type of cases, officials were bracing for what it might mean for everyday life. Some school districts were adding cleaning staff, scrubbing buildings and preparing for absences from school. Emergency medical officials were weighing new protocols. And some businesses were contemplating what working from home might mean for their operations.One of the cases appeared in Santa Clara County, where Google and Apple have their headquarters and which also includes San Jose, the 10th-largest city in the nation.“This has become very real for everyone in our community,” Sam Liccardo, the mayor of San Jose, said on Friday evening as he prepared to meet with city staff about the implications. “There’s certainly a lot of concern and the concern is justified.”Emergency medical workers in San Jose who answer calls from people with coronavirus-like symptoms will now be instructed to wear protective clothing, he said. “We are going to need to take every reasonable precaution without resorting to panic or finger-pointing.”For weeks, local and state health departments across the country have been stretched thin by the coronavirus outbreak, and the cases of unknown origin signaled a new front in their efforts. “Most public health departments can respond to one case or two cases,” Dr. Joshua Sharfstein, a public health professor at Johns Hopkins, said. “But it’s going to be many more than that.”On Friday, California health officials said they had greatly expanded their ability to test for the virus, and experts said the public health response in the affected counties should include examining specimens of people who may have been hospitalized for or killed by a respiratory illness in recent weeks.“This case does signal to us that it’s now time to shift how we respond to the novel coronavirus,” Dr. Sara Cody, the public health director for Santa Clara County, said. “Now we need to add other public health tools to the mix,” including looking systematically for the disease to understand its scope and magnitude, she said.In Solano County, where the first U.S. case of unexplained origin was announced earlier in the week, local officials have fielded calls from scores of concerned residents.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“I’m middling alarmed,” said Rick Lodwick, as he tossed a jumbo pack of sanitizing wipes into the back of his car in the parking of a big box store in Vacaville.“When I heard it was here, I thought, ‘We’re going to have trouble,’” Mr. Lodwick said.Solano County, northeast of San Francisco, is a place of cattle ranches, biotechnology research facilities, a military base and vineyards. An investigation was started into all contacts the sick woman from the county might have had with friends, neighbors and medical workers.“People are concerned and they’re paying attention,” said Jeremy Craig, the city manager of Vacaville. “But I don’t think there’s a panic.”Restaurants were full on Friday, the manager of a movie theater said there had been no decline in ticket sales, and it was very rare to see someone wearing a mask.Dr. Bela T. Matyas, the public health officer in Solano County, said officials had begun monitoring dozens of people with whom the woman who fell ill there had interacted in recent weeks — including relatives, co-workers and others she might have had contact with through her job — and had asked them to quarantine themselves at home. At least 124 nurses and other health care workers were under self-quarantine, a nurses’ union reported.The woman was later taken by ambulance to the University of California, Davis Medical Center in Sacramento. At that hospital in recent days, some workers seemed deeply concerned about possible exposure.“I’m worried how this will affect my baby,” said Vickie Poncalo, a cashier at the hospital’s cafe who is seven months pregnant.“Should we be wearing a mask and worrying that people are walking around here?” she asked. “Should I even be here?”