6 Takeaways From the Democratic Debate in Nevada
By Shane Goldmacher and Reid J. EpsteinLAS VEGAS — Phew. That was a debate.Here are six takeaways from the most gloves-off, knives-out Democratic debate so far in the 2020 presidential race.After eight debates that had sparks of conflict but were relatively cordial, Wednesday night brought two hours of nonstop political battle.Every candidate got attacked. Senator Elizabeth Warren sometimes attacked almost everyone in a single breath. Former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg found himself facing incoming fire within the debate’s first seconds and looked very much like the out-of-practice politician he was before his tardy entry to the presidential campaign in November.The night revealed the desperation of everyone onstage who wasn’t Senator Bernie Sanders or Mr. Bloomberg, whose hundreds of millions of dollars in TV advertising threaten to drown most of his rivals come Super Tuesday.It portends a new, nastier phase of the campaign as the candidates hit the campaign trail before 16 states and territories hold Super Tuesday primaries and caucuses on March 3. And it raises the question of how much uglier the candidates might be when they gather again for the next debate on Tuesday night in Charleston, S.C.It was Mr. Bloomberg’s debut on the presidential debate stage. He did not make a good first impression.After saturating the airwaves with unprecedented levels of advertising for almost three months, Mr. Bloomberg was on the defensive from the opening gun. Mr. Sanders hit him for his support of stop-and-frisk police tactics. Ms. Warren eviscerated him as a sexist (“a billionaire who calls women fat broads and horse-faced lesbians”) who had “muzzled” women with nondisclosure agreements. Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said the former mayor didn’t manage New York City very well.It didn’t get better from there.Mr. Bloomberg’s shakiest stretch came when Ms. Warren pressed him over his nondisclosure agreements with women who worked for his company. When she said, “I hope you heard what his defense was: I’ve been nice to some women,” Mr. Bloomberg visibly rolled his eyes in annoyance.Mr. Bloomberg steadfastly refused to budge, dismissing the private complaints with a one-liner that did not land.“Maybe they didn’t like a joke I told,” he said.Later, he awkwardly described the agreements — with unknown monetary payments — as being “made consensually.”He sounded uncomfortable both defending his stop-and-frisk record and his very recent change of heart. He accused Mr. Sanders — who is leading in the polls — of “communism,” which the Vermont senator slapped away as a “cheap shot.” As they exited the stage, Mr. Biden said on MSNBC, he turned to Mr. Bloomberg and said, “Welcome to the party, man.”After the New Hampshire debate early this month, Ms. Warren said she had her hand up a lot but didn’t get called on much. This time, she not only spoke more than any of her rivals, but she also often set the terms of the debate.It was the kind of aggressive performance that allies and even some of her campaign advisers had been hoping for, even if it marked a sharp shift from her recent strategy of appearing as an above-the-fray candidate who could unite Democrats.She had one-liners. And twice she plowed through the weaknesses of so many of her opponents in a single answer that it left moderators struggling to even give everyone a chance to respond. Perhaps most notably, she forcefully addressed health care and her “Medicare for all” plan, which has been a liability for months.She said that former Mayor Pete Buttigieg’s health care plan was “not a plan, it’s a PowerPoint” and that Senator Amy Klobuchar’s was more “like a Post-it note.” She said even advisers to Mr. Sanders admitted his package “probably won’t happen anyway.”How the performance will play out among voters in the coming days and weeks remains to be seen. Ms. Warren had stagnated in recent weeks. But on Wednesday night she looked like a fighter determined to go the distance, and her campaign wasted no time boasting of a huge financial haul — $1 million raised during the debate itself, and $2.8 million raised throughout the day — as a potential sign of a revival.transcriptThere are still so many questions about what happened in Iowa. You can see that Pete Buttigieg is presently leading the state delegate count with 27%; Bernie Sanders with 25%. Candidates are already looking toward New Hampshire.Let me take this opportunity —To thank the people of New Hampshire for a great victory tonight.Moderate candidates, Pete Buttigieg and Senator Amy Klobuchar trailed Sanders to round up —Breaking news from the Democratic presidential race, where a national poll out this morning shows the former New York mayor is now in second place with 19% support behind Bernie Sanders. Michael Bloomberg, whose rise in the polls is fueled by more than $300 million in ad spending. Mayor Bloomberg has not appeared on a single debate stage or a single ballot, but that will change tonight.It’s Alex Burns in Las Vegas, where Wednesday night’s Democratic debate was held ahead of the Nevada caucuses this weekend.From NBC news, the Democratic Presidential Debate, live from Las Vegas, Nevada.This was a debate we were all really waiting for because it was first time Mayor Bloomberg has appeared on the stage. And really, it’s the first time he has engaged with other Democratic candidates at all since entering the race. Polls released over the last few days have shown Bloomberg overtaking Joe Biden, nationally, as the moderate runner-up to Bernie Sanders, the front runner, thanks to hundreds of millions of dollars that Bloomberg has poured into advertising. But for most Americans, this was the first time that they have really been introduced to the man himself. So going in, we knew that all the other candidates were going to try to make that a rough introduction to scuff up the glossy image of himself that Bloomberg puts in TV ads. And right away, they did.I think we need something different than Donald Trump. I don’t think you look at Donald Trump and say, we need someone richer in the White House.Thank you. Mayor Bloomberg —Democrats are not going to win if we have a nominee who has a history of hiding his tax returns, of harassing women, and of supporting racist policies like redlining and stop-and-frisk.Stop-and-frisk.Stop-and-frisk, which went after African-American and Latino people in an outrageous way.Throwing close to five million young black men up against the wall.That is not a way you’re going to grow voter turnout.They, of course, went after stop-and-frisk, his invasive policing policy as mayor of New York.Mayor Bloomberg, at the beginning of this debate, you took some incoming fire on this next topic, so let’s get into it. At 2015, this is how you described your policing policy as mayor. Quote, “We put all the cops in the minority neighborhoods.” And you explain that is, quote, “because that’s where all the crime is.”And early on, NBC moderator, Lester Holt, asked Bloomberg to address it.You went on to say, “And the way you should get the guns out of the kids’ hands is to throw them against the wall and frisk them.” You’ve apologized for that policy. But what does that kind of language say about how you view people of color or people in minority neighborhoods?Well, if I go back and look at my time in office, the one thing that I’m really worried about, embarrassed about was how it turned out with stop-and-frisk. And we started a — we adopted a policy, which had been in place, the policy that all big police departments use — of stop-and-frisk. What happened, however, was it got out of control.From the beginning, he struggled with his responses.And we have to keep the lid on crime. But we cannot go out and stop people —All right, mayor.— indiscriminately.Mayor, thank you. Let me go to —This was the number one question that Bloomberg would have known was coming. More than any other policy issue, this is the one his campaign has worried about from the start of the race. But —I’ve sat. I’ve apologized. I’ve asked for forgiveness. But the problem —Bloomberg is a man known for his political agility, or his comfort expressing contrition, or for his thick skin. And it showed.And if we took off everybody that was wrong off this panel, everybody that was wrong on criminal justice at some time in their careers, there’d be nobody else up here.And the attacks were just sort of unrelenting. Up until this point, Elizabeth Warren has mostly avoided direct confrontation in debates with other candidates. She has been calling herself, “the unity candidate.” But she took a totally different approach, a far more aggressive approach. And Mike Bloomberg was her favorite target.I’d like to talk about who we’re running against.She landed some of the most stinging blows in the debate, drawing a connection between Bloomberg and public enemy number one for the Democrats.A billionaire who calls women, “fat broads” and “horse-faced lesbians.” And no, I’m not talking about Donald Trump; I’m talking about Mayor Bloomberg. Democrats are not going to win —Perhaps, the most contentious exchange of the night, and the toughest one for Bloomberg, was a lengthy back and forth between him and both Warren and Joe Biden about a number of women who have signed nondisclosure agreements with Bloomberg and his company.He has gotten some number of women — dozens? who knows — to sign nondisclosure agreements both for sexual harassment and for gender discrimination in the workplace. So Mr. Mayor, are you willing to release all of those women from those nondisclosure agreements so we can hear their side of the story? [APPLAUSE]We have a very few nondisclosure agreements.How many is that?Let me finish.How many is that?None of them accused me of doing anything other than — maybe they didn’t like the joke I told. And let me just point — [CROWD MURMURING] — and let me point — those would be agreements between two parties that wanted to keep it quiet. And that’s up to them. They signed those agreements, and we’ll live with it.Warren challenged him over and over to release those women from the NDAs and let them speak openly about their experiences.And when you say they signed them, and they wanted them. If they wish now to speak out and tell their side of the story about what it is they allege, that’s now OK with you? You’re releasing them on television tonight?Senator, no.Is that right?Bloomberg said he would not do it.Tonight?Senator, the company and somebody else, in this case — the man or a woman, or could be more than that, they decided when they made an agreement, that they wanted to keep it quiet for everybody’s interest.No.Come on.They signed the agreements. And that’s what we’re going to live with.I’m sorry. No. The question is —I heard your question.— are the women bound by —But the latest is what these attacks reflect about the state of the Democratic race and the urgency that the candidates are feeling in this moment. Bernie Sanders’s lead is looking increasingly strong heading into the Nevada caucuses. And as we’ve talked about many times, part of that has to do with the fact that the more moderate candidates are dividing the votes amongst themselves, making it harder for any one of them to emerge as a clear alternative to Sanders. Now, in comes Michael Bloomberg with all of his money and his power and name recognition. But so far, he has done more to slow down fellow moderates than to thwart Bernie Sanders.Senator, when you say that you disowned these attacks, and you didn’t personally direct them, I believe you.Well, thank you.But at a certain point, you got to ask yourself, why did this pattern arise? Why is it especially the case among your support?I don’t think it is especially the case, by the way.That’s just not true. Look —Well, people know —And so that meant it wasn’t just Bloomberg on the defensive. The other Democrats also had to take on Sanders, himself.What a wonderful country we have. The best-known socialist in the country happens to be a millionaire with three houses. What’d I miss here? [CROWD MURMURING]Well, you’ll miss that I work in Washington, house one.That’s the first problem.Live in Burlington, house two.And they had to take on each other.Of the country to ourself.Are you trying to say that I’m dumb? Or are you mocking me here, Pete?I’m saying that you shouldn’t trivialize —I said I made —There was more open hostility, more personal bitterness in this two-hour debate than in perhaps all the other debates combined. And that’s because the stakes for the candidates are higher now. And for many of them, really for almost all of them, time may be close to running out. So that’s the latest. Mr. Sanders won the most votes in the first two states. He is leading in Nevada polls. He is leading in national polls. He has been raising more than all his rivals. But he was still not the central focus of his rivals at the debate.The arrival of Mr. Bloomberg and his large fortune has threatened the path forward for all the other anti-Sanders candidates and served as something of a distraction. And so they focused more on the former mayor than the surging senator who is building momentum by the day, and who could add even more if he carries the caucuses here on Saturday.Some rivals hit him: Ms. Warren on his health plan not being realistic; Mr. Buttigieg on the toxicity of some Sanders supporters online; Mr. Bloomberg on his support of socialism and predicting that Mr. Sanders would lose to President Trump.But there was no singular moment that would seem to upend his current positive trajectory, both in Nevada and nationally. And even if Mr. Sanders did not deliver his most forceful performance, that might be enough.It was not so long ago that Mr. Biden was widely assumed to be the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination. Wednesday’s debate showed that no one else in the race thinks that’s the case now.Standing in the center of the stage, Mr. Biden spent the night watching everyone else challenging and criticizing one another while avoiding much mention of him. Only a couple of spare remarks from Ms. Warren addressed Mr. Biden’s political record. Everyone else clearly thought their time was better spent going after the others.It marks quite the comedown for Mr. Biden, the race’s polling leader for the better part of the last year. But after finishing fourth in Iowa and fifth in New Hampshire — two early-state disasters — Mr. Biden is on the ropes. He’s struggling to raise money, his super PAC is gasping for air and Mr. Bloomberg is spending heavily to try to fill the center-left vacuum.Mr. Biden’s team said this week that he must finish in the top two in Nevada and then win South Carolina to be a contender on Super Tuesday. This debate suggests his rivals don’t think he’ll meet those marks.Forgive us for wondering on Wednesday night if Ms. Klobuchar and Mr. Buttigieg wanted to physically harm each other onstage at times.While Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders loathe the idea of a self-funding billionaire nominee like Mr. Bloomberg, no two presidential candidates loathe each other with the fire of Ms. Klobuchar and Mr. Buttigieg.The dynamic was on full display at the debate: The two dismissed each other’s experience as irrelevant to governing, with Ms. Klobuchar saying Mr. Buttigieg hasn’t been “in the arena.” Mr. Buttigieg all but called Ms. Klobuchar incompetent for forgetting the name of the president of Mexico.When Mr. Buttigieg leveled an attack on Ms. Klobuchar’s Senate voting record as insufficiently progressive, she glared at him and shot back a line that encapsulates how she — and others in the field — feel about the 38-year-old former mayor: “I wish everyone was as perfect as you, Pete.”The Buttigieg-Klobuchar conflict is consequential. With Mr. Bloomberg now near the top of polling in key Super Tuesday states, the other moderates cannot hope to both top the 15 percent threshold to win enough delegates to keep their campaigns viable. Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar appear to know a lesson from the Harry Potter children’s book series: One must die for the other to survive.Updated May 25, 2020