Surveillance Tools Will Lapse as Trump Signals Possible Veto
By Charlie Savage and Nicholas FandosWASHINGTON — Three F.B.I. tools for investigating terrorism and espionage will expire at least temporarily on Sunday after President Trump suggested on Thursday that he might veto a bipartisan surveillance bill to extend them and the Senate left town without voting on it.The intervention by the president — known for his unpredictability on surveillance policy — potentially disrupted an agreement to resolve a broad debate over national security and privacy related to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or FISA.“Many Republican Senators want me to Veto the FISA Bill until we find out what led to, and happened with, the illegal attempted ‘coup’ of the duly elected President of the United States, and others!” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter.Mr. Trump’s comments came a day after the House had passed a bipartisan bill to extend the expiring tools while also adding safeguards to national security wiretapping under FISA.Several of the president’s most vocal allies backed the legislation, and Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, enthusiastically urged swift passage of the House’s bill. But on Thursday, the Republicans whom Mr. Trump had referred to in his tweet raised objections that prevented the Senate from passing the bill on an expedited basis. An attempt to extend the expiring authorities for 45 days to buy more time also fell apart.By the day’s end, senators left town for the weekend and Republican leaders had plans to pass the House’s agreement early next week when they have more time — with hopes that Mr. Trump would ultimately relent and sign it into law.The president did not explain whether he was suggesting that he might not sign the bill — negotiated this week by Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the House Republican leader — or a short-term extension that Republican senators were contemplating.But the intervention showed that Mr. Trump remains an unpredictable and volatile decision maker on surveillance legal policy. Republicans in the House thought they had assurances from the White House that Mr. Trump would sign their bill before they voted.Because the bill will not be passed by Sunday, the F.B.I. will at least temporarily lose three powers that lawmakers created after the Sept. 11 attacks. They include the authority to get a court order for business records that are relevant to a terrorism or espionage investigation.The powers lapsed briefly once before — in 2015 — because of a similar stall in the Senate. The impact of a short-term gap may be small. Any existing court orders for business records and special types of wiretaps, for example, will still be valid during the lull. And the F.B.I. can most likely use other authorities, like grand jury subpoenas, from its criminal investigative toolbox as a workaround.Still, the lapse could cause some operational headaches, and the spectacle of governing dysfunction arising from Congress in the national security arena and a measure for which there is very likely majority support was striking.Mr. Trump and his supporters are invested in promulgating a conspiracy theory that the F.B.I.’s counterintelligence investigation into Russia’s efforts to manipulate the 2016 presidential election was actually a politically motivated attempt to sabotage his presidency, not a legitimate attempt to understand a foreign power’s interference in American democracy.An investigation by the Justice Department’s independent inspector general, Michael E. Horowitz, concluded that the Russia investigation — including efforts to understand the nature of numerous links between Russia and the Trump campaign — had a lawful basis, and found no evidence that its opening was politically motivated.Mr. Horowitz did, however, uncover serious errors and omissions in one aspect of the inquiry: investigators’ applications for permission from the FISA court to wiretap Carter Page, a former Trump campaign foreign policy adviser with many links to Russian officials.None of the expiring tools were involved in the Page applications. But the legislation to extend them has become a vehicle for Congress to respond to the inspector general’s findings. The House bill, for example, would push the FISA court to appoint an outsider to critique the government’s arguments when a wiretap application raised serious issues about First Amendment activity, which could include political campaigns.Even before Mr. Trump’s Twitter remark, it was uncertain whether the House’s rewrite could pass the Senate in time to prevent the expiring F.B.I. tools from temporarily lapsing. Under Senate rules, senators can express their displeasure by slowing legislation moving through the chamber for days, though not stopping it.In this case, Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, threatened to use procedural tools to hinder its passage if Mr. McConnell brought the bill for consideration on Thursday. Mr. Lee does not believe the House’s language sufficiently protects Americans’ civil liberties from government spying, and he said on Thursday afternoon that “rights are at stake” and that all he was really demanding was a full debate.“This is unjust, this is unrealistic, this is unsustainable,” Mr. Lee said.Civil libertarians on the right and the left made similar objections in the House, but several of Mr. Trump’s staunchest conservative allies, including Representatives Jim Jordan of Ohio and Devin Nunes of California, who have led the attack on the F.B.I. over the Page spying case, lent their approval to the bill. So did Attorney General William P. Barr.When Mr. McConnell took to the Senate floor earlier Thursday to endorse the bill, he indicated that he knew that Mr. Lee and other civil-libertarian-minded lawmakers would objected that the bill did not go far enough, but made clear he did not intend to let them win.“It is not a question of if this passes, but when,” Mr. McConnell said. “I hope that my colleagues who may not choose to vote for this legislation will not deny this body the opportunity to renew these authorities today to prevent any lapse.”In 2018, when another part of the complex legal architecture governing national security surveillance — a law known as Section 702 of the FISA Amendments Act, which permits warrantless wiretapping of foreigners abroad — was about to expire, the White House and Mr. Trump’s Republican allies in Congress pushed to renew it with minimal new privacy protections, turning back a push by civil libertarians to impose more significant limits.But on the cusp of the crucial vote, Mr. Trump abruptly denounced the legislation after seeing a commentator on Fox News speak critically of it and urge him to change course, telling him that his own “woes” began with surveillance.