Why Candidates Want to Be Iowans’ Second Choice
Ranking first is still the best, of course. But in the Iowa caucuses, second-choice candidates can win.By Lisa LererHi. Welcome to On Politics, your guide to the day in national politics.The snow was starting to come down. Senator Amy Klobuchar was snapping selfies at a campaign event. And Monica Peitz and Peg Raney, two friends from central Iowa, were discussing the question that it seemed every Democrat in the state was asking: Who is on your list? Here’s how Ms. Peitz, a 65-year-old retired social worker, detailed her decision-making process to me yesterday, as I traveled around Iowa talking to voters.“I’m going to stand up for John Delaney,” she said, describing how she planned to support the former Maryland congressman in her caucus next month. “So, I caucus for John Delaney, and my next thought is: Who am I going to go to when John Delaney isn’t viable? And I don’t know yet.”A few feet away, Carrie King, 45, told me she was considering Andrew Yang, Ms. Klobuchar and Pete Buttigieg, the former mayor of South Bend, Ind.Oh, and she hadn’t written off Joe Biden quite yet. “I want to try to get to some events,” said Ms. King, who is from suburban Des Moines. “There’s a lot of options, I think, in the next few weeks.”Yes, Iowa voters are a promiscuous lot — at least in terms of their presidential votes. And when it comes to the caucuses, it doesn’t have to be love at first sight. There’s a strong political case for being Mr. or Ms. Good Enough.First, a quick explanation of how the caucuses work: Democrats will gather at locations across the state on the night of Feb. 3 and sort themselves into groups supporting each candidate. The key word is viability. If a candidate doesn’t get the support of 15 percent of the people in the room at an individual caucus, that candidate is considered nonviable, and his or her supporters must reallocate themselves to someone else.transcriptThis was Iowa caucus night back in the mid-1970s. And these are members of the national media covering the voting. It was so unusual to see national media in Iowa back then that people actually paid to watch them. “The Democratic Party charged $15 a head for people to watch the media watch the people.” See, in previous years, Iowa’s caucuses just hadn’t attracted national attention. “There are 3,000 frozen media members in downtown Des Moines …” Just over a decade later, Iowa is the place to be. “… It’s Iowa caucus night. Let’s party.” [shouting] The caucuses are now a key part of the presidential election cycle. “Bush, 57.” They’re the first chance to see what kind of support candidates have among voters. So how did we get here, from caucuses that only Iowans seem to care about to the national spectacle we see today? Turns out, a lot of it was accidental. For most of Iowa’s history, its caucuses were dominated by political insiders. There was little room for input from rank-and-file members. An historian writing in the 1940s put it like this: “The larger number of party voters were deprived of a voice.” But the old ways start coming to an end in 1968. The country’s in turmoil, and so is the Democratic Party, mostly over the Vietnam War and civil rights. Basically, the party establishment wants to handle things one way, and many rank-and-file members have other ideas. All this comes to a head as the Democrats hold their national convention. Protesters gather outside. So do police. Inside, the mood is also tense. All this division leads the Democratic Party to rethink the nomination rules to include the voices of all party members in the process. This is how we come to the moment when Iowa becomes key to electing a president, basically by accident. First up, how Iowa became first to hold a presidential contest. It starts with new rules to give everyday members more of a say. So by 1972, winning Iowa now involves four stages. Iowans choose their top candidates, first at the precinct level. These are the caucuses at the heart of this story. But technically, there’s further voting at the county, congressional district and state levels. The new rules make things a lot more inclusive, but this creates new delays. Committees need to be formed, and everyone needs to have up-to-date party materials. The problem is, the state party only has an old mimeograph machine to make copies of all this. It’s really slow. So because of an old machine and a bunch of new logistics, the party decides it needs at least a month between each step to do it all. The national convention is set for early July, so you’d think that the state-level convention would happen about a month before, in June. Except, the party can’t find a venue that’s available to hold everyone. That little detail helps push everything earlier in a chain reaction. See what’s going on here? The precinct caucuses now have to happen early in the year. The party chooses a date that makes Iowa’s the first presidential contest. The New Hampshire primary has been the first kickoff contest since the 1950s, but Iowa Democrats aren’t necessarily looking for national attention. They just think it’ll be fun to be first. Still, attention is what they get. The story begins with George McGovern. “People didn’t know much about the Iowa caucuses. As a matter of fact, there wasn’t a great deal of interest in them.” He’s the long-shot candidate. He’s been at the bottom of national polls. “He often walked the campaign trail alone, little known by the voters.” Most people think this guy, Edmund Muskie, is going to be the big winner in Iowa. “That challenge is great, but we can meet it.” Then comes caucus night. As the people vote, state party officials gather at their headquarters. Richard Bender is one of them. “And we had about 10 or 12 press people show up. These press people included one guy, Johnny Apple.” Johnny Apple, a 37-year-old political correspondent for The New York Times. Iowa’s Democrats aren’t ready to publicize the results right away. They hadn’t expected much demand. According to Bender, only Johnny Apple asked for them that night. “I happen to be fascinated with such things, so I made it my business, beforehand, to understand it.” Bender sets up a phone tree to gather results from across the state. He adds them up himself with a calculator. And the next day, Apple’s article helps swing the national spotlight onto the caucuses. He’s got quite the story to tell. Muskie’s won, but just barely. Not the runaway win people were expecting. And McGovern comes in a strong second. No one expected that, either. The reformed caucus rules helped a long-shot candidate rise to the top. And because this is happening so early in the election now, and because Apple’s article gives the results national coverage, something else happens. “That got picked up by some of the national news shows.” “The Democratic front-runner has been damaged in Iowa.” “And wow, all of a sudden, we were being paid attention to.” McGovern eventually wins the Democratic nomination. “I accept your nomination with a full and grateful heart.” He loses the presidential election, but some haven’t forgotten what those early caucuses did for McGovern, including Georgia’s former governor, Jimmy Carter. Three years later … “There was a major headline on the editorial page of the Atlanta Constitution that said, ‘Jimmy Carter’s running for what?’ [laughter] And the ‘What’ was about this big. [applause] I’m running for president.” … Carter heads to Iowa before any other Democratic candidate. He’s got no national profile. “He didn’t have hordes of press following him around. It was a very lonely campaign.” Washington pundits call his candidacy laughable. “I remember when we couldn’t find a microphone.” “Jimmy Who?” becomes a catchphrase. Carter’s own campaign film plays it up. “Jimmy who?” “I don’t know who he is.” But as long as Iowans come to know him and like him, Carter bets that the media will start paying attention, just like with McGovern four years earlier. Carter campaigns as locally as possible. One day, he learns that he’s been invited on a local TV show. “And I said, that is great. I can’t believe it. I said, ‘What are we going to do?’ He said, ‘Do you have any favorite recipes?’ And I said, ‘What do you mean, recipes?’ He said, ‘Well, this is a cooking show.’ Well, they put a white apron on me and a chef’s hat. That was my only access to TV when I first began to campaign in Iowa.” His opponents are in Iowa, too, but they spend far less time there. Carter wins. “Surprisingly top of the class after his win in a somewhat obscure race in Iowa against the others.” “You can’t tell until we go to the other 49 states, but it’s encouraging for us.” A year later … “I, Jimmy Carter, do solemnly swear —” … he becomes the 39th president. Now we need to head to 1980 because we haven’t talked about the Republicans yet. Here’s the state’s Republican chairman that year. He’s asked why Iowa’s caucuses have become so important. “I think because Jimmy Carter got his start in Iowa in 1976.” The Republicans in Iowa are keen to copy the Democrat’s success, and one candidate in particular gets inspired by Carter’s underdog win: George H.W. Bush. He’s running against Ronald Reagan, Bob Dole and others, and he’s near the bottom of the pack. “Your name isn’t really a household word, but Ronald Reagan can —” But Bush goes big in Iowa. He gets a surprise win. It’s a far cry from just months before. “I was an asterisk in those days. And my feelings got hurt. And now, I’m no longer an asterisk.” Bush is now the third underdog to get a boost from the caucuses. The next morning on CBS, he distills the essence of this new Iowa effect. “We will have forward, ‘Big Mo’ on our side, as they say in athletics.” “ ‘Big Mo?’ ” “Yeah. Mo — momentum.” Bush loses to Reagan, but becomes vice president. And the desire to capture the “Big Mo” from Iowa has only grown, thanks in large part to Iowa’s embrace of being first, and the media storm that descends every four years. That’s despite the fact that most candidates who win … “This is a job interview.” … don’t become president. Plus, many point out that the state’s overwhelmingly white population doesn’t reflect the country’s diversity. “I actually think that we can find places that represent that balance of urban and rural better.” But the race to get the “Big Mo” out of Iowa persists because it’s the first chance to upend expectations, and put political fates in the voters’ hands.And right now, there are a lot of voters up for grabs. In the latest Des Moines Register/CNN poll, considered the gold standard for surveying the state’s notoriously hard-to-predict caucuses, about a third of likely Democratic caucusgoers were either undecided or supporting a candidate who was pulling in less than 15 percent support over all.Mr. Delaney received less than 1 percent statewide, meaning he’ll probably be nonviable at most caucuses. So whomever Ms. Peitz picks as her second choice is likely to end up being her far more consequential decision.So, who’s in the best position to benefit from this kind of political settling? Based on what we can tell from the polling right now, it’s likely to be Mr. Biden, the former vice president, or Mr. Buttigieg. Over all, Senator Elizabeth Warren is the most popular second choice among likely caucusgoers in recent polling. Taken at face value, those numbers suggest she’s primed to benefit the most from the format of the caucuses. But that’s a bit deceiving.Patrick Murray, the director of the Monmouth University Polling Institute, which released a new poll of Iowa this afternoon, told me that 83 percent of Ms. Warren’s second-choice support came from likely caucusgoers who listed another top candidate as their first choice. So, a lot of Ms. Warren’s second-choice support is likely to be blocked by Mr. Biden, Mr. Buttigieg and Senator Bernie Sanders — all of whom are well positioned to reach that 15 percent threshold in most of the caucuses, barring a major shift in the race. It’s probably more illuminating to look at the choices of the 32 percent of voters in the Register poll who were either undecided or backing a candidate outside the top tier. Of that group, more than half said they were also considering Mr. Buttigieg or Mr. Biden. Only 43 percent said they were considering Ms. Warren, and 41 percent said the same about Mr. Sanders. Keep in mind, the Iowa caucuses are often decided by a tiny number of participants at the margins. One top campaign strategist estimated to me last week that 80,000 people — fewer than those who live in Mr. Buttigieg’s hometown — will be enough to win the state. How did those easy-listening political prophets Hall & Oates put it? Oh, right: Your kiss, your kiss is on my list. But Mr. Delaney is not. Here’s something to add to your reading list: The New York Times editorial board (which is completely separate from the newsroom) is publishing its endorsement for the Democratic nomination on Sunday, and all this week, they’re releasing transcripts of their interviews with nine of the leading candidates. You can read through their conversations with Bernie Sanders and Tom Steyer. And on Sunday night, their pick will be revealed in a special episode of “The Weekly” on FX and Hulu.Drop us a line!We want to hear from our readers. Have a question? We’ll try to answer it. Have a comment? We’re all ears. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.Do winners of the Iowa caucuses become president?— Robert S. Hedges, Ames, IowaAfter the candidates have spent months — or even years — plowing through the Iowa snow, eating corn dogs and talking about ethanol, Robert asks a pretty smart question: Is all this effort predictive of future success?Not really. Except when it comes to the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination.Since the first modern caucuses in 1972, the two parties have produced 18 different winners — 10 Democrats and eight Republicans, according to an analysis by The Des Moines Register. Only three of them would eventually win the presidency. But seven of the 10 Democrats who won their caucuses later won the Democratic nomination, compared to just three of the Republicans. So, if you’re a Democrat, winning the caucuses means you have fairly decent odds of eventually capturing the nomination — if not the White House.It’s worth noting that this year could be more complicated because of changes in the rules. The state party will now release tallies from the initial vote at each caucus along with the final votes after the nonviable candidates have been weeded out, in addition to the count of delegates each candidate won. That raises the possibility that multiple candidates could claim victory by pointing to the results most favorable to them. (We’ll be publishing a fuller explanation of this soon, so stay tuned!)The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from the Bronx.Were you forwarded this newsletter? Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox.Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.Updated May 25, 2020