He’s Overseeing a City’s Coronavirus Response, Even as He Fights It Himself
By Adeel HassanRoland Walker is the health commissioner of Gary, Ind., where positive coronavirus tests are on the rise. One of them belonged to him.His parents, both of whom are in their 80s, tested positive as well and were hospitalized. His father, who had a seizure, is now recovering and has been discharged. His mother remains on a ventilator.He is also trying to care for the residents of Gary, the city of 75,000 where he was born and raised, and his patients, both at a hospital and at the pediatric practice he and his wife share — all while quarantining at home.“The stress came from when my parents got ill,” said Dr. Walker, 48. “It has been very, very scary.”He spoke with The New York Times this week about how he and his family are social distancing, and the challenges facing Gary as the virus spreads. The conversation was edited and condensed for clarity.When did you take the test? How long did it take to learn the result?I wasn’t going to take it originally, because I was asymptomatic. My wife and I practice together. We have a private practice and we get our temperatures taken every time we go in. We’ve been fine.Ten days ago, I learned that three people I was around had been exposed to the virus, and I was tested. It took about five days to get the test results, and during that time I was still wearing a mask and gloves in the office and everywhere.People are scared, and I wanted to go public about the result to show that eight out of 10 who are positive are going to be asymptomatic. That would serve as a good lesson.Ninety-nine percent of the comments have been supportive, but I’m fixated on the 1 percent. It’s similar to when everyone was so scared of H.I.V. in the early 1980s.How are you and your parents doing?Physically, I feel fine. Both of my parents ended up testing positive. Neither of them showed respiratory symptoms at first.My father showed weakness and went to the hospital twice. He had a seizure — the coronavirus can take many forms. But he’s sitting with me right now and doing normal activities.My mother is on a ventilator. My wife is negative. My 13-year-old daughter is completely asymptomatic.How hard is it for you to follow social distancing when you and your family members are all under one roof?My parents live in Mississippi. I brought them up about the 18th of March. In Mississippi, the state was not doing a lot of social distancing, and they weren’t closing restaurants and church services. I thought they’d be safer.My house is a tri-level, so that makes it easier. My parents have a bedroom and bathroom area that is separate, and we practice social distancing in the house.I am a pediatrician and kids are coughing constantly. We’re making a mistake in not mass-testing kids, because they seem to congregate the most and bring it back to their homes. I love kids, but they’re a caldron of germs.How are you taking care of yourself, your family, your practice and your city?I’m a marathon runner and I continue to train. I think I have good lung capacity. The stress came from when my parents got ill. I’ve had a lot of crying, I’d be lying to you if I didn’t tell you that. It has been very, very scary.My wife, who is the smart one, has been running the practice. My daughter plays Little League baseball; she is a second baseman. We’ve gone to the field. That’s something we can do during social distancing. But when too many other people showed up, we just had to stop. I’ve been given a reprieve from coaching Little League, thank God, because my responsibility has increased.Today I spent most of the day putting out of fires. It has been disappointing at times, but I’ve been heartened when I see six-foot squares at stores marking off the distance. I make it a point to compliment them. People are adhering to the guidelines, but now with the warmer weather, I’m not sure that it will last.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.At the end of the day, I play the piano and relax my mind.Gary itself has underlying conditions — a large number of low-income residents and a high rate of lung disease — that could make it more susceptible to the pandemic.It doesn’t make them more susceptible to infection, but many more people have it than we know. We have little testing, so we don’t know who has been exposed and who has immunity.Gary is 25 minutes from downtown Chicago, and they might peak in the next week or week and half or so. Porter County, which sits to the east of Gary, is having trouble.When you live somewhere, you really want to make sure that it receives the attention. You understand what the challenges are.How is the city coping? What is your outlook?The mayor told me, “Don’t be afraid to think grand,” and I told him we need a field hospital. So we have the Army Corps of Engineers building a field hospital of about 100 beds, and we’ll also be using a hotel for patients.The State Department of Health has had a lack of testing. What we’ve also had to do is go into the private market to purchase testing kits and personal protective equipment, where all the bids drive the price up. The city just got its first shipment of tests this week, though the hospital has been testing.I’ve seen the best in people and the worst in people. There are testing center scams that are going on, where people drive up and think they are getting tests. That’s the worst in people.