Twitter Blocks The Federalist for Promoting Coronavirus Parties
By Michael LevensonTwitter on Wednesday temporarily locked the account of a conservative website after it promoted an article suggesting that the medical community should consider intentionally infecting people with the coronavirus at “chickenpox parties” to help slow the spread of the virus.The article, titled “How Medical ‘Chickenpox Parties’ Could Turn The Tide Of The Wuhan Virus,” argued that a “controlled voluntary infection” program could allow young people to return to work after contracting and recovering from the virus.Such a strategy, the article stated, could promote “herd immunity” and help save the economy.Many figures on the right have expressed concern about the toll on the economy from prolonged social distancing and from the closing of businesses. President Trump on Tuesday said he would “love to have the country opened up, and just raring to go, by Easter,” a timeline that top health professionals said was far too soon.Twitter said the article posted by the conservative website, The Federalist, as well as a tweet about it, violated the company’s rules, which ban content that flouts the recommendations of public health officials on the coronavirus.The company’s policy requires the removal of tweets that encourage people to disregard social distancing guidelines or that describe “harmful treatments or protection measures which are known to be ineffective.”The action comes as misinformation about the virus has spread rapidly on social media, frustrating companies like Facebook, Google and Twitter that have worked aggressively to stop the promotion of “miracle cures” and other false information.The Federalist promoted the article to its more than 230,000 followers with a tweet that read it was “time to think outside the box.”Twitter then locked The Federalist’s account until the tweet was removed. The article was still posted on The Federalist’s website as of Wednesday night.Benjamin Domenech, the publisher of The Federalist, and Mollie Hemingway, a senior editor, did not immediately respond to emails seeking comment on Wednesday.Dr. Douglas A. Perednia, who wrote the article, said he disagreed with Twitter’s action.“I don’t think they read the article,” he said. “They may be reacting to the headline, but they’re not reading the article itself.”Dr. Perednia of Portland, Ore., described himself as a recently retired medical internist who also trained in dermatology.Dr. Perednia’s article was published a day after Gov. Andy Beshear of Kentucky announced that a young person in that state had tested positive for the virus after attending a “coronavirus party” held in defiance of social distancing guidelines.Dr. Perednia’s article suggested “allowing people at low risk for severe complications to deliberately contract Covid-19 in a socially and medically responsible way so they become immune to the disease.”Such a strategy, the article stated, “could be a powerful tool for both suppressing the Wuhan coronavirus and saving the economy.”“It could reduce the danger of passing Covid-19 to vulnerable populations, drastically reduce the amount of social isolation needed, reopen businesses and even help achieve the level of ‘herd immunity’ needed to stop the spread of the disease within the population,” Dr. Perednia wrote.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Some medical professionals strongly disagreed.Dr. Arthur L. Caplan, a medical ethicist at New York University’s Grossman School of Medicine, said that so little was known about who was truly at low-risk for infection and why that such a program could lead to a surge in deaths.“It is dangerous and irresponsible,” he said. “To run around saying, ‘I’m going to take a lethal virus and deliberately infect you to build your immunity’ not only makes no medical sense, it gets pretty close to advising homicide.”Dr. Andrew A. Lover, an assistant professor of epidemiology at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst, called the article “exceedingly ill-advised and not evidence-based in any way shape or form.”But some doctors said it might be worth exploring strategies other than social distancing to combat the spread of the pandemic.Dr. Daniel J. Morgan, a professor of epidemiology and public health at the University of Maryland School of Medicine, said he would not endorse intentionally infecting people, but added that it was worth considering ways to increase herd immunity while protecting vulnerable patients.