Loeffler’s Wealth Becomes a Risk as Rivals Charge She Profited on the Coronavirus
By Nicholas FandosWASHINGTON — When Georgia’s governor picked Kelly Loeffler, a little-known Atlanta businesswoman, to fill the state’s vacant Senate seat late last year, her vast personal wealth and ability to fund her own campaign were top selling points for Republicans.Ms. Loeffler, whose husband runs the New York Stock Exchange, pledged to put $20 million of her own fortune toward holding onto the seat in a special election this November. She bought a private plane to fly to and from Washington. And she blanketed televisions with ads highlighting her American-dream-style rise from a humble family farm to the pinnacle of high finance.Now, amid an economic crisis brought on by the coronavirus pandemic, Ms. Loeffler’s wealth is threatening to become a major political liability. She is facing questions about whether, in actively trading millions of dollars in stocks over the past couple of months, she and her husband have profited off the crisis based on information she received through her position as a senator.Ms. Loeffler, who adamantly denies wrongdoing, is one of several senators whose investments have come under scrutiny in recent days. The Securities and Exchange Commission and the F.B.I. are investigating the decision by Senator Richard M. Burr, Republican of North Carolina, to liquidate most of his portfolio in mid-February before the markets collapsed, a review that a person familiar with it said would most likely include multiple other lawmakers.But Mr. Burr is retiring. The fallout for Ms. Loeffler, a political newcomer up for election in just seven months, is potentially much more damaging. She faces a formidable challenge not only from Georgia’s resurgent Democrats but also from Representative Doug Collins, a Republican and vocal defender of President Trump who has refused to drop out of the race despite pleas from party leaders.Democrats and Mr. Collins are both working to try to transform what just months ago promised to be one of Ms. Loeffler’s strongest political assets — her financial acumen — into a fatal flaw.“There are a lot of people angry at a person who has possibly used nonpublic information to benefit themselves personally while telling Georgians it was all going to be OK,” Mr. Collins said in an interview on Wednesday, referring to public statements Ms. Loeffler made weeks ago playing down the threat of the virus.A former financial executive, Ms. Loeffler, 49, calls the charges preposterous, particularly for someone schooled in insider trading laws. Her investments, like her husband’s, are handled by outside financial advisers, she has said, and those advisers alerted her about the transactions in question only well after they were made.“These accounts are managed by third-party entities,” Ryan Mahoney, a spokesman for Ms. Loeffler’s campaign, said Wednesday. “She doesn’t have any oversight, she doesn’t have any discretion. These are simply attacks during a very difficult time in America and in Georgia.”The controversy stems from millions of dollars worth of trades made in the name of Ms. Loeffler and her husband in late January after she attended a private, senators-only briefing on the virus with top government health officials. At that time, as the disease was raging in China, few Americans realized its potential to become a pandemic.The stocks sold, including Exxon Mobil, Ross Stores and AutoZone, later lost a significant amount of value, prompting accusations of insider dealing by critics who argued that the timing of the transactions could not be a mere coincidence. But there is no evidence that senators received any significant nonpublic information in the briefing.New public disclosure forms filed with the Senate late Tuesday showed that stocks worth millions of dollars owned by Ms. Loeffler and her husband continued to be actively traded in February and early March, as the markets began to sharply decline. In some cases, the couple saved money they might have otherwise lost by selling, but in aggregate the trades do not appear to have made a substantial impact on their net worth, which exceeds $500 million.Ms. Loeffler is married to Jeffrey Sprecher, the founder and chief executive of Intercontinental Exchange, or ICE, a publicly traded company whose crown jewel is the New York Stock Exchange. Ms. Loeffler was the chief executive of Bakkt, an ICE subsidiary, before accepting the Senate post. She is also the co-owner of Atlanta’s W.N.B.A. team, the Dream.The legal risk to Ms. Loeffler is probably low, and there is not yet any evidence that she is under federal scrutiny like Mr. Burr. The Stock Act makes it illegal for members of Congress to trade on nonpublic information they encounter in their work. But no one has ever been prosecuted under the law, and if it is as Ms. Loeffler describes, her financial arrangement would insulate her from charges, experts said.Still, questions about her investments could do lasting political harm to Ms. Loeffler at a time when many Americans are on edge and concerned about the devastating financial toll the crisis has taken on them.“She may not have any kind of legal problems, but it does indicate she comes from a very different world than 99.99 percent of Georgians,” said Charles S. Bullock III, a political-science professor at the University of Georgia.Mr. Bullock said the stock trades — particularly if they become an explicit target of a federal investigation — could “plant the seed of doubt in some voters’ mind: Can a person who is this wealthy represent your concerns, as, say, a family that has lost its job because of this pandemic?”Even before the virus began ravaging the United States, Mr. Collins had been trying to use Ms. Loeffler’s wealth against her, putting together hard-edge digital ads making light of her expensive clothing and private plane to paint her as out of touch with ordinary people.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“From the public perspective, people require us, rightly or wrongly, to look after their interest, not our own,” Mr. Collins said on Wednesday.Democrats, who see the seat as a potential pickup opportunity at a time when their party is making gains in the state, have made an aggressive push to capitalize on the sales, as well. American Bridge, a liberal super PAC, cut a digital ad tagging Ms. Loeffler as “Crooked Kelly.”“Georgia hospitals are at their breaking point and Georgians are losing their jobs, their businesses and their retirement savings, yet apparently all Senator Loeffler could think about was her stock portfolio,” said Helen Kalla, a spokeswoman for Senate Democrats’ campaign arm.Polling commissioned by Mr. Collins’s campaign shows a sharp uptick in those viewing Ms. Loeffler unfavorably in the days after initial reports in March about her January stock sales, though there have not been public surveys that confirm the findings.Republicans involved in the race played down the long-term political risk to Ms. Loeffler. They pointed out that Republican voters had eagerly embraced Mr. Trump’s wealth, despite the complications it had created, and argued that as long as Ms. Loeffler continued to explain her unusual financial arrangements, they would not punish her either.Ms. Loeffler’s allies have tried to turn the attacks on her against her rivals. Jesse Hunt, a spokesman for Senate Republicans’ campaign arm, said on Wednesday that Democrats were spreading “false attacks” based on shoddy journalism. He took aim at Mr. Collins, as well.“What’s shocking is there’s a so-called Republican perpetuating liberal lies against another Republican during a global pandemic because his feelings are permanently hurt,” he said.