California Governor Orders Radical Changes to Daily Life
Monday: The governor told bars to close and residents 65 and older to stay home. Also: Mayor Eric Garcetti, of Los Angeles, ordered new restrictions.By Jill CowanGood morning.(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today by email.)On Sunday afternoon, Gov. Gavin Newsom capped a gloomy weekend by issuing sweeping new guidelines in an effort to head off the spread of the coronavirus in the nation’s most populous state.He told anyone 65 or older and anyone with chronic health conditions to isolate themselves at home.“Bars, nightclubs, wineries, brew pubs and the like” should close, he said. All restaurants, he said, should halve their capacity and keep customers at least six feet from one another.The governor said there were no enforcement measures attached, yet — but those could come if people do not adhere to the guidelines.[Here’s the state’s page with links to containment guidelines for various situations.]The new measures came in the midst of a fast-moving pandemic, which has killed thousands around the globe.Federal officials on Sunday recommended that all gatherings of 50 or more people nationwide be canceled or postponed for eight weeks.[Read the latest updates from around the world here.]In California, as of Sunday afternoon, Mr. Newsom said there had been six deaths linked to the virus. The state had 419 confirmed cases, according to data compiled by The New York Times.Roughly 8,300 tests for the virus had been administered in California, Mr. Newsom said, and health officials were working to ramp up that number.He highlighted a pilot partnership with Verily, a subsidiary of Google’s parent company, to help figure out which people should be tested, and to direct them to mobile testing sites around the Bay Area.[Read more about how President Trump oversold Verily’s promise as a fix for the crisis.]Already, Mr. Newsom said, more than half of California’s school districts have announced they’ll be closed today. Those closures will affect roughly 80 percent of the state’s schoolchildren.He emphasized that he was working with leaders around the state to implement complicated plans to ensure that all of those children are fed as usual, and that their parents are able to make whatever adjustments they need to make, without suffering economic consequences.The state was negotiating to reopen shuttered hospitals in anticipation of a likely surge of demand for hospital beds, Mr. Newsom said.[Here’s a look at the workers at the greatest risk of infection.]He added that the state was working to move as many people as possible living on the streets or in homeless encampments into empty hotels or trailers.Finally, as calls rose for lawmakers to figure out a way to halt evictions, Mr. Newsom told reporters that he’d have an answer on Monday afternoon.Los Angeles’s mayor, Eric Garcetti, took the restrictions a step further, ordering all restaurants in the city of 4 million to close, except for delivery and takeout, starting at midnight last night, until at least March 31.He also ordered movie theaters, gyms, fitness studios and other retail businesses to shutter during that time. Grocers, banks and pharmacies will be exempt from the restrictions.Mr. Garcetti said in an address broadcast on Facebook that he’d seen some Angelenos not taking proper precautions or dismissing the crisis on the basis of misinformation.“I want to stress we’ve not taken these steps lightly,” he said. “When they feel right, it’s too late.”He pleaded with residents not to panic-buy groceries or other supplies and announced a moratorium on evictions — a moratorium he said he asked city staff members to work to expand to commercial renters as well as residential tenants.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“The work we do today will have an impact on those we love and the city’s history,” he said.My colleague Dana Goldstein reported that educators are dealing with the challenges of virtual learning.Many students come from homes where even connecting to the internet can be a hurdle, and for younger children, necessary adult help on the other end of the online connection can be hard to come by if parents still have to report to work.Still, experts in remote learning advised schools to make sure parents can text teachers for help. Here’s the full story.Our Parenting site has lots of resources and answers to questions about what happens if your child’s school is closed.The governor on Friday signed an executive order directing schools to use state funding to pay for distance learning and to continue providing school meals.California officials have emphasized that people may be eligible for unemployment insurance if they can’t work because their child’s school is closed. Here’s more information from the state.Please share your experiences: If your child’s school is closed, tell us how you’re coping. Have you come across any tips or tricks that have been helpful? Email us at CAtoday@nytimes.com.It’s surreal to be in a position to recommend petting a virtual emotional support dog, brought to you by The New York Times, but here we are. It’s soothing. If you’re stressed, click here to do that, and find a tiny bit of calm.California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.