Coronavirus Briefing: What Happened Today
By Patrick J. LyonsThis is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.With another 3.2 million new claims last week, one-fifth of the American labor force has filed for unemployment since mid-March.The governor of Texas said people in his state would not be jailed for defiantly reopening businesses.Poland postponed its presidential election, set for Sunday, amid concerns that it could not be conducted safely or fairly now.Get the latest updates here plus maps, a tracker for U.S. metro areas, and full coverage.To prepare for the day when stay-at-home orders would be eased, public health experts at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention drew up guidelines detailing what schools, restaurants, churches and other gathering places should do to reopen safely.But when the agency submitted them to the White House, a battle erupted. Some members of the coronavirus task force complained that the guidelines, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, were too prescriptive, and requested revisions.President Trump has been desperate to reopen the economy as quickly as possible, and his aides thought that following the C.D.C.’s safety guidelines would slow the process and be bad for business.The guidelines for houses of worship ran into especially fierce resistance, a federal official said, with complaints raised that telling churches how to conduct services safely would infringe on religious freedom.States rush ahead regardless: The guidance the Trump administration has issued for states to start reopening their economies is being widely ignored. According to the criteria, a state should not relax restrictions until its daily case count has been falling for two weeks and steadily fewer tests are coming back positive. But more than half of the 30 states that are reopening now fail on one or both counts.Not waiting to be told: An analysis of consumer spending data by our colleagues at The Upshot shows that Americans began hunkering down on their own, days or weeks before officials issued social distancing guidelines and stay-at-home orders.Consumers were spending less, traveling less, dining out less and working less outside the home. Small businesses were scaling back employment and even closing up shop.That suggests, they write, that people will also choose their own moment to emerge and reopen their businesses and their wallets and will not necessarily jump when governors say.The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.Epidemiologists around the U.S. have noticed an unsettling disparity: Latinos are contracting the virus at higher rates than the population as a whole.In Iowa, Latinos account for more than 20 percent of coronavirus cases, though they make up only 6 percent of the population. In Washington State, it’s 31 percent of cases, compared with 13 percent of the population.Public health experts believe it may be because many Latinos work in low-paying jobs on the front lines and lack access to health care. They also tend to have higher than average rates of diabetes and other underlying conditions that increase their vulnerability.The disparities are largest in states like Oregon, Washington and Utah, whose Latino communities are newer and less established. In states like California, Arizona and New Mexico, longstanding Latino communities with more resources have infection rates that are closer to those of non-Hispanics.Racial disparities in Britain: Black people in England and Wales are twice as likely to die from the coronavirus as white people. Experts attribute the disparity to underlying health and social inequalities.And in New York City, video images of disputes between police officers and minority residents have raised questions about whether there is a racist double standard in how social distance rules are being enforced.A new study of 1,343 people in the New York area found that nearly everyone who has had the coronavirus — even those who experienced only mild symptoms — makes antibodies at levels that may confer future protection against the disease.There had been worries that some patients seemed to have few or no antibodies, but the new study suggests that it’s a matter of when the test is administered: People with meager results in the first few days after recovery often developed healthy amounts of antibodies later on. The researchers recommended waiting three weeks after the onset of symptoms.Scientists don’t yet know for certain whether the antibodies confer immunity. But if they do, the new study suggests that nearly everyone who recovers from Covid-19 will have immunity.Killing the virus with light: Special ultraviolet light fixtures installed on walls or ceilings could play a role in reducing the spread of the virus. The technology, known as “upper-room ultraviolet germicidal irradiation,” is already used to disinfect the air in hospitals, but stores and restaurants could do the same to reassure jittery customers.The coronavirus outbreak in New York City has been the primary source of infections around the United States, researchers have found, as both visitors and locals carried it across the country before stay-home orders were imposed.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.How do they know? Genetic studies, travel histories and outbreak models connect the dots. “We now have enough data to feel pretty confident that New York was the primary gateway for the rest of the country,” said Nathan Grubaugh, an epidemiologist at the Yale School of Public Health.Soccer teams in Germany, Italy and Spain have resumed training in the hope of restarting their seasons.In India, a lethal gas leak that killed at least 11 people may have resulted from a rush to reopen a chemical plant.Millions of people in Italy have returned to work, but schools, nurseries, day care centers and summer camps remain closed, leaving many parents to worry about having to choose between jobs and family.Here’s a roundup of restrictions in all 50 states.Make a sourdough starter. Can’t find yeast at the grocery store? With a little patience, you can achieve leavening with your own homemade starter, using water and flour along with potatoes, dried fruit or many other ingredients.Have a good cry. There are emotional benefits to losing control (within reason) for a little while during tough times. You might also find a little relief in venting to a trusted friend, indulging in a favorite dessert or just curling up in the fetal position.Join our movie club. Every week our film critics A.O. Scott and Manohla Dargis watch a classic movie and discuss it. This week it was Spike Lee’s “Do the Right Thing,” and yes, they said it’s still a great movie, 31 years later.The coronavirus, or bits of it, may linger in semen, researchers ion China say — but sexual transmission of the virus still seems very unlikely.While we are on the subject, here is how the coronavirus may be changing the dating game — for the better.Decades of ownership by private equity firms gutted many nursing homes financially and left them ill-equipped to cope with the coronavirus outbreak, according to an analysis by The Times.Henry Grabar writes in Slate about how short the “bladder’s leash” has become: The lack of access to (or willingness to risk using) public restrooms may constrain the reopening of society.Each of our family members makes a PowerPoint presentation on something of interest, and then we draw names out of a hat to see who has to present it. It is hysterical to watch someone make a presentation when they have no understanding of the topic and have no idea what is on the next slide. Our topics have ranged from Aristotle’s rhetoric to a ranking of my daughter’s ex-boyfriends.— Colleen D’Angelo, Dublin, OhioLet us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.Sign up here to get the briefing by email.