‘No One Needs Botox in a Pandemic.’ But Some in Beverly Hills Are Now Getting It.
By Shawn HublerWith a hoodie over her ears, a surgical mask over her nose and an eye on the clock — “I have four boys under the age of 12, and they’re home-schooling” — 42-year-old Ally Sample was making up for lost time at her Beverly Hills plastic surgeon’s office on Friday.“I just have these lines up here,” she said, peering into her cellphone’s camera. “See?”She touched the space above her eyebrows, tracing yet another downside of the coronavirus pandemic: Stay-at-home orders had blocked her regular Botox injection. That is, until the Beverly Hills City Council came to her rescue this week.In a decision that aligned a local ordinance with state public health guidance, Beverly Hills on Tuesday rescinded a city moratorium on elective surgery, clearing the way for the city’s cosmetic surgeons to reopen immediately.Councilman Julian Gold, an anesthesiologist, said the move was prompted by Gov. Gavin Newsom’s announcement earlier that day of a phased plan for reopening the state’s economy for business. Beverly Hills had preceded the state in enacting social distancing regulations, and its March 16 ordinance had gone further than the rest of California in halting medical procedures that might take beds and equipment from patients infected by the virus.But as California has begun to flatten its curve, Dr. Gold said, the city’s physicians and surgery centers have sought to resume seeing other patients, many of whom have deferred colonoscopies, heart valve replacements, angioplasties and other treatments.“At some point, forcing people to delay necessary health care is irresponsible,” he said, “even if it’s just a routine dental exam.”Alas, that is not the narrative the public has picked up on, said Councilman John Mirisch, who cast the sole no vote. In a city known for its beautiful people and their service sector, he warned the council on Tuesday, “elective surgery” surely would be construed to mean “cosmetic surgery.”“I think it would be extremely irresponsible of us and it would send a terrible message to the world if the first thing we do is start allowing boob and butt jobs to happen again,” Mr. Mirisch told the Council.Since then, he said Friday, he has gotten an earful, both from constituents concerned about the virus’s potential spread and from medical offices reporting landlords who are using the vote to subtly pressure them to reopen.“This is having unintended consequences,” Mr. Mirisch said. “No one needs Botox in a pandemic.”He cited a direct message he had just received on Instagram from an employee in a plastic surgery office who was worried about becoming infected if she returns to her workplace.“Thank you for your insight and for voting what is right and safe,” she wrote, decorating her note with moneybags and face-palm emojis. “You wouldn’t believe the number of people calling to make injection appointments right now.”Steven Teitelbaum, the former president of the California Society of Plastic Surgeons, said patients at his practice in nearby Santa Monica have continued to call throughout the state’s shutdown, hoping to schedule cosmetic procedures. “But,” he added, “the Beverly Hills vote doesn’t change anything.”“No mainstream surgeon I know sees this as any green light,” Dr. Teitelbaum said. “We’re still bound legally and ethically by the directives of the governor and the ethics of the profession.” And, he noted, even Mr. Newsom specified when he unveiled his plan for the state’s economy to reopen that cosmetic surgery was not approved in the early phases.“My office is shut, and I’m going to stay shut until the stay-at-home order is lifted,” he said, adding that his practice, except for emergencies, is mostly telemedicine for the moment, and that most of his Beverly Hills colleagues have the same plan.Not all, though.The doctor was in on Friday in Arash Moradzadeh’s office, where he was working to finally reschedule a backlog of 40 operations.Swathed in gloves, a protective gown, a face mask and a face shield, Dr. Moradzadeh said the council’s decision had allowed him “in a very, very small way” to get back to work after a month and a half of being sidelined. The lost income, he said, forced him to furlough four employees.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.He said he had been interviewing patients over the phone to trace their contacts before seeing them in person. “They can’t bring friends, they have to wear a mask, too, and even then, the consult is greater than six feet apart,” he said.Those who go through with surgery will be tested three days before for the coronavirus and will have to self-isolate at home for a week after. For extra safety, he said, he plans to operate in a local outpatient center rather than his office. His first post-shutdown surgery, he said, is a May 6 rhinoplasty, one of four procedures he has scheduled that day.Until then, he said, he has been seeing regulars like Ms. Sample, who said she had demanded the first available appointment when she heard the city order had been lifted.“I’m like overly overdue,” she joked, adding that she was a month late for her quarterly regimen. “All my friends are calling their doctors, too.”Other than for medical care, she said, she has not ventured outside her Los Angeles home. She has been having her groceries delivered.“I doubt other people notice as much as I do,” she said, laughing.