Florida Pastor Arrested After Defying Virus Orders
By Patricia MazzeiMIAMI — Before the Rev. Rodney Howard-Browne, the pastor of a Pentecostal megachurch in Florida, held two church services on Sunday — each filled with hundreds of parishioners — lawyers from the sheriff’s office and local government pleaded with him to reconsider putting his congregation in danger of contracting the coronavirus.The pastor ignored them, proceeding with the services at the River at Tampa Bay Church and even providing bus transportation for members who needed a ride.On Monday, Sheriff Chad Chronister of Hillsborough County said he had obtained an arrest warrant for Mr. Howard-Browne for “intentionally and repeatedly” defying emergency orders mandating that people maintain social distance and stay at home.“His reckless disregard for human life put hundreds of people in his congregation at risk and thousands of residents who may interact with them this week in danger,” Sheriff Chronister, who is a Republican, said at a news conference in Tampa. “Our goal here is not to stop anyone from worshiping, but the safety and well-being of our community must always come first.”Mr. Howard-Browne, 58, who lives in Hernando County, turned himself in on Monday afternoon. He was booked in jail and freed 40 minutes later after posting a $500 bail. He faces two second-degree misdemeanor charges of unlawful assembly and violation of public health emergency rules.Florida is the second-largest state in the country, after Texas, with no statewide order requiring people to stay at home, leaving in place a hodgepodge of restrictions that have allowed many Floridians to maintain a semblance of normal life. Local authorities have frequently cited the lack of a state mandate as reason to urge — rather than require — residents to take precautions. The coronavirus poses a unique threat to the state, with its large older population and millions of visitors.Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican, said on Monday that he would sign an order codifying local rules urging people to remain indoors, but only in Southeast Florida, from Key West to West Palm Beach, the most densely populated stretch of the state where many restrictions were already in place. The region accounts for about 60 percent of Florida’s more than 5,700 coronavirus cases, Mr. DeSantis said.He has blamed some of the contagion on travelers from New York and Louisiana fleeing hot zones there and ordered those visitors to quarantine. Florida has closed restaurants except for takeout and delivery, urged people 65 or older to stay home, suspended vacation rentals and taken other steps, but it has not ordered a statewide shutdown of nonessential businesses or beaches.The editorial boards of local newspapers have clamored for the governor to take bolder action. Physicians in Southwest Florida who are worried about hospitals becoming overwhelmed have asked Collier and Lee Counties, home to Naples and Fort Myers, to shutter nonessential businesses and order people to remain at home. County commissioners have refused to go that far without guidance from the governor.Wildly different approaches by local officials have prompted outrage, especially online. While the city of Jacksonville, in Duval County, shut down its beaches, St. Johns County to the south did not. A striking aerial photo over the weekend showed bare beaches on one side of the county line and crowded sand on the other. (St. Johns County later closed its shoreline.)“It’s really rather scary, because my neighbors aren’t really paying attention — and I live in an elderly community,” said Vicki Stanbury, 59, of Boynton Beach, a city in Palm Beach County. She said she was aghast to see people packed inside Walmart and Publix over the weekend without any apparent attention to social distancing.“There was a little strip mall — Pet Supermarket, open. AT&T store, closed. Post office, open. Laundry center, open. Beauty school, closed. G.N.C., closed. Panera Bread, open,” she said. “I would like to hear the message that this is really serious: ‘Stay home, do not go out. Do not go to religious services. Do not be wandering around Atlantic Avenue with 15 of your friends. Do not go down by the beaches.’”Democrats have called on the governor, a strong supporter of President Trump, to issue a statewide stay-at-home order, but he has insisted on what he calls a “tailored” approach.That allowed Hillsborough County to order that people stay at home — and it was that local order Mr. Howard-Browne defied, even as religious services of all kinds have been canceled across the country, or moved online.The pastor had claimed the First Amendment protected him from having to follow the order. Andrew Warren, the state attorney for Hillsborough County, said emergency orders “are constitutional and valid” and apply to everyone.“I’d remind the good pastor of Mark 12:31, which says there is no more important commandment than to love thy neighbor as thyself,” said Mr. Warren, a Democrat. “Loving your neighbors is protecting them, not jeopardizing their health by exposing them to this deadly virus.”Video of the Sunday morning service showed members of the congregation standing close together, even as Mr. Howard-Browne claimed that social distancing rules were in place.“I know that they’re trying to beat me up for having the church operational, but we are not a nonessential service,” he told parishioners. “Suddenly we are demonized because we believe that God heals, that the Lord sets people free, and they make us out to be some kook.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Liberty Counsel, an organization whose lawyers frequently defend the religious right, said it would represent Mr. Howard-Browne. The group, which noted that church staff members wore gloves on Sunday and provided hand sanitizer, called the local orders flawed.“The problem with this administrative order is it was not reviewed by constitutional experts or vetted by a deliberative body,” Mat Staver, Liberty Counsel’s chairman, said in a statement. “Contrary to Sheriff Chronister’s allegation that Pastor Howard-Browne was ‘reckless,’ the actions of Hillsborough County and the Hernando County sheriff are discriminatory against religion and church gatherings.”Earlier this month, Mr. Howard-Browne, who has been at the White House and prayed over Mr. Trump, had encouraged his parishioners to greet one another despite public health warnings against shaking hands: “This Bible School is open because we are raising revivalists, not pansies,” he said on March 15.Sheriff Chronister said that lawyers from his office and the county attorney’s office, responding to an anonymous tip, had advised the church’s legal team on Friday that holding services would violate the law. Members of the sheriff’s command staff went to the church in person on Sunday to try to dissuade Mr. Howard-Browne. He would not meet with them, the sheriff said, and held services in the morning and evening.“They have access to technology allowing them to live stream their services over the internet and broadcast television for more than their 4,000 members to watch from the safety of their own homes,” Sheriff Chronister said. “Instead, they encouraged people to come and gather at church.”Other area churches, including the 34th Street Church of God, a nondenominational church in Tampa, have shut their doors and moved their services to live stream, the Rev. Thomas Scott said at the news conference.