To Test or Not to Test?
Wednesday: As California gradually allows businesses to reopen, officials say there still isn’t enough testing to move more quickly.By Jill Cowan and Brian X. ChenGood morning.(Don’t get California Today delivered to your inbox? Here’s the sign-up.)For weeks, officials have said California’s reopening will be incremental and varied across the state. On Tuesday, it became a little clearer what that actually looks like.Gov. Gavin Newsom announced that the first two counties, Butte and El Dorado, had met the criteria for easing some restrictions ahead of the rest of the state and that more were expected to follow. (Indeed, as of Tuesday night, five other counties had been added to the list.)That means restaurants in those counties may be able to open for dine-in service, as long as they take precautions; the state released lengthy guidelines for doing so on Tuesday.[See which California counties have the most coronavirus cases.]They say restaurants should take steps like adding partitions to areas where it’s difficult to stay apart, implementing temperature or other symptom checks for workers, and prioritizing outdoor seating. Customers should wear face coverings when they can.“If we love our community and our restaurants, let’s protect them,” Mr. Newsom said, adding that if consumers and workers feel unsafe, reopening more places won’t do much good.The guidelines serve as a kind of preview for diners in the Bay Area or Los Angeles, where stricter orders are expected to be in place longer than in other parts of the state.Testing capacity continues to be a major hurdle to lifting restrictions, officials have said.Mr. Newsom said that as of this week, the state was averaging about 35,000 tests per day — many more than the 2,000 tests per day on average about a month ago, but still short of the roughly 61,000 per day that experts have said should be a baseline.He said there were plans to mandate testing at nursing homes, where CalMatters reported testing is still lagging.Even as the capacity to test for Covid-19 has expanded, there’s still lingering confusion about who should actually sign up.My colleague Brian X. Chen, who writes about consumer technology, tried to figure it out for himself. Here’s his dispatch on what happened:My journey to getting tested for Covid-19 started with a text message. I had opted to receive texts from the San Francisco government about the pandemic, and last Monday my phone vibrated with an alert: “SF is offering Covid-19 testing for anyone who lives or works in SF. For more info at sf.gov/GetTestedSF or call 311.”I took this to mean universal testing had reached the city. That would be a major development, because pandemic experts have said that as many people as possible need to get tested to get a clear picture of Covid-19’s spread.So even though I lacked symptoms, it seemed like a civic duty to accept the city’s invitation to be tested. I quickly clicked through the website to schedule an appointment. So did my wife.A day later, my wife had second thoughts. She saw that the city government’s website about the test had conflicting messages. While it said anyone in the city could get tested, another portion of the site said: “Check if you can get tested,” stating that essential workers or people with at least one symptom were eligible.So did this mean that my wife and I, who don’t fit the criteria, were taking a test away from others? My wife called 311, and a city worker said only essential workers or people with symptoms should be taking the test.[Read more about California’s testing expansion plans.]She left a voice mail message with Color, the test lab, asking to cancel her appointment. A Color employee called back and reassured her that there was an abundance of tests available, and if people wanted to contribute to the city’s data gathering, they should do so. We kept our appointments.On Friday afternoon, we drove to the test site in downtown San Francisco. The lab had set up several white tents in a large parking lot, divided into two sections, for drivers and for pedestrians. People with cars drove through a lane of orange cones and rolled down their windows to be swabbed. Pedestrians stood in line to take the test, with markers to keep them six feet apart.When it came our turn, we drove up to the swab station. A medical worker asked whether I had a preference for a nostril (I chose the left). Then he took a giant Q-tip and jammed it up there, holding it for 10 seconds.It was painful. Stinging and mushy at the same time. (Was I actually swabbed in the brain?) After repeating the process for my wife, the worker handed us bar codes that we could later check on Color’s website for the results. We drove off in tears.While the test was simple, I was still confused about the city’s “Get Tested” website and whether we had done the right thing. I asked the mayor’s office for clarity.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Tyrone Jue, the senior adviser to the mayor who oversaw the Get Tested SF campaign, said my wife and I had inadvertently taken the test. It was meant for essential workers and people with symptoms.So why say anyone can get tested?Mr. Jue explained that the city faced a challenge. There are economically disadvantaged groups that are more likely to be exposed, and many avoid getting tested in fear of unemployment. To encourage those people to get tested, the city worked with community organizers to come up with inclusive messaging: Anyone living or working in the city can get tested. (Not just anyone though.)[Read more about why the virus is deadlier for black and Latino Californians.]“The language, while confusing, is true,” Mr. Jue said. (Since last week, the Get Tested website was updated to make the city’s eligibility requirements more clear, but it still states that anyone can get tested.)Since the introduction of this language, test numbers are up, Mr. Jue said. But that’s in part because people who were ineligible for testing — like me, my wife and a dozen of our friends who got the memo — were swabbed. Thankfully, our results were negative.We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.The California State University, the nation’s largest four-year public university system, will go online in the fall. Administrators fear a second coronavirus wave. [The New York Times]The results of the special election for California’s 25th Congressional District seat aren’t final. But you can catch up on live analysis here. [The New York Times]Paul Vasquez, whose pure, unbridled joy at spotting a “double rainbow” made him an early viral sensation, has died at age 57. He grew up in East Los Angeles and lived near Yosemite. [The New York Times]California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, went to school at U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter.