Coronavirus Casts Unwelcome Spotlight on Trump’s Health Secretary
By Noah Weiland, Maggie Haberman and Michael D. ShearWASHINGTON — Two of President Trump’s top health officials were stewing last month in a drab room at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta as Mr. Trump and his health secretary, Alex M. Azar II, were concluding a laboratory tour, one that they had been left off of.One of the officials, Dr. Jerome M. Adams, the surgeon general, was then invited to join the president and the secretary to shake hands. The other, Seema Verma, who leads the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, was not. Instead, a staff member told the powerful Medicare chief to head to the receiving line with the rank and file. Furious, she left for the airport to catch a commercial flight home to Washington.The episode from March 6, described by senior administration officials who believed Mr. Azar was behind the snub, illustrated to them why Mr. Azar’s future as secretary of health and human services is a constant question, even as his sprawling department battles the worst public health crisis in a century. Where Mr. Azar goes, personal conflicts seem to follow, senior administration officials say. Officials at the Department of Health and Human Services disputed that notion.The department’s newly installed spokesman, Michael R. Caputo, dismissed such talk as beside the point.“I can tell you that the American people want information they can use to fight the coronavirus, not palace intrigue,” he said.But even before the coronavirus pandemic, senior White House officials had grown deeply frustrated with Mr. Azar and his management of the department.His toxic relationship with Ms. Verma became so ugly and public last year that the two were summoned to the White House in December to determine whether they could continue to work together. Mr. Azar has also repeatedly clashed with Joe Grogan, the director of the White House’s Domestic Policy Council, who two senior administration officials said would soon leave his post. In recent weeks, several people close to the president grew even angrier with Mr. Azar for what they viewed as a public relations effort on his part to generate favorable coverage of his response to the virus at the president’s expense.Now, Mr. Azar finds himself increasingly sidelined by Mr. Trump and his advisers, who blame the secretary for early failures on testing and for what they describe as inconsistent stewardship of the coronavirus task force in its first month.Over the weekend, the president denied that he was preparing to fire Mr. Azar, calling the reports “Fake News” and saying Mr. Azar was doing “an excellent job!”But Vice President Mike Pence took over for Mr. Azar as the leader of the task force at the end of February, and in the weeks since the episode at C.D.C. headquarters, Mr. Azar has been excluded from key coronavirus meetings, administration officials say, including one led by Mr. Grogan and another involving only the nation’s top medical officials.“These are all arguably people who theoretically report to him, work for him, but like everything else, that has been upended in this administration, where it isn’t very clear if cabinet secretaries are choosing or even co-choosing their top political appointees,” said Kathleen Sebelius, a health and human services secretary under President Barack Obama. “I don’t have any idea how you operate in that environment when you’re excluded from meetings with your agency.”Aides to Mr. Azar say he remains fully in charge of his department and is an integral part of the administration’s response to the virus. White House officials continue to dismiss questions about his status.“Even with the president’s tweet on Sunday flatly denying rumors that Secretary Azar is on his way out or that he is doing anything other than an excellent job, the media is still focused on outrageous claims of palace intrigue that are only meant to distract the American people from the Trump administration’s bold leadership in response to this pandemic,” said Judd Deere, a White House spokesman.But the monthslong coronavirus crisis has exacerbated deep and longstanding divisions between Mr. Azar, a former pharmaceutical executive, and political officials in other parts of the administration, including some of those closest to Mr. Trump in the White House.In the last several weeks, the president grew angry with Mr. Azar after articles in The Washington Post and The New York Times depicted the White House as slow to respond to the coronavirus outbreak, according to several officials familiar with his thinking. They said Mr. Trump was enraged that he was being criticized in accounts that portrayed Mr. Azar as having been aggressive in responding to the threat early on.Mr. Azar’s allies say he was one of the few people who tried to alert the West Wing to a looming public health crisis in January and early February. They note that some officials accused Mr. Azar of being “an alarmist” for his repeated warnings about the coronavirus at a time when Mr. Trump was publicly playing down the threat.But others have said Mr. Azar was not clear enough with Mr. Trump about the magnitude of the threat. Several aides to the president said that Mr. Azar was so focused on keeping his job and preserving his standing in the White House that he gave conflicting information — dire one day, optimistic the next — that ended up confusing Mr. Trump and his senior advisers.Some of Mr. Azar’s critics have even accused him of misleading top White House officials. Last week, senior officials felt blindsided when Dr. Rick Bright, the head of a crucial drug and vaccine development unit at Department of Health and Human Services, issued a blistering statement saying he had been removed from his post after he resisted political pressure to back unproven drugs publicly heralded by the president. In a meeting in the Situation Room moments earlier, Mr. Azar had told the vice president that Mr. Bright had received a promotion.The episode at the C.D.C. headquarters has also reverberated with White House and health officials, some of whom saw it as an example of Mr. Azar’s pettiness. Ms. Verma had made a special effort to get to Atlanta after traveling the day before with Mr. Pence, catching up to the president after his tour had been canceled, then abruptly put back on his schedule.But she was left off the president’s tour, which unfolded on national television. Mr. Azar stood with Mr. Trump, who wore a red “Keep America Great” hat produced by his re-election campaign, and Dr. Robert R. Redfield, the director of the C.D.C., for almost an hour as the president extolled his administration’s work. Ms. Verma and Dr. Adams were nowhere to be seen. To then be told to join a receiving line with other guests waiting to shake Mr. Azar’s hand infuriated Ms. Verma.One senior administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the events, insisted that Mr. Azar had no knowledge of the staging of the C.D.C. event, and that it was dictated by White House advance officials.Mr. Azar remains a member of the primary coronavirus task force and continues to be an active participant in the group’s meetings, though for weeks he has not appeared regularly alongside the president or vice president during the daily news conferences held afterward. In recent weeks, Mr. Azar has also made fewer appearances in the national news media, which are coordinated through Mr. Pence’s office.He has also been missing from the “operational check-ins” held before the task force’s meetings where officials organize and prepare. The gatherings in the Roosevelt Room are led by Mr. Grogan and include the heads of the key health agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services, including the C.D.C., the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and the Food and Drug Administration.Mr. Grogan has told associates that he purposefully excluded Mr. Azar, according to one senior administration official. Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Azar is not a part of the regular meetings of a group of the administration’s senior health officials with medical degrees, including Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the federal government’s top infectious disease expert, and Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator.“If you don’t have the health secretary as the lead, it’s very unclear who is the lead,” Ms. Sebelius said.The recent tensions have prompted White House officials, including Mark Meadows, the new chief of staff, to discuss possible replacements for Mr. Azar once the coronavirus crisis stabilizes, according to senior administration officials. Among the names discussed have been Ms. Verma, Dr. Birx and Dr. John C. Fleming, a former House Republican and official at the Department of Health and Human Services who is now an aide to Mr. Meadows.But some of Mr. Trump’s aides cautioned that advisers had gotten ahead of themselves by putting out word that Mr. Azar could be replaced in the coming weeks. Senior administration officials say the president will most likely wait until the summer to make a change, once the immediate crisis has diminished, if he makes one at all before the election.Mr. Azar has told several administration officials that he wants to leave his post on his own terms.But if Mr. Azar is removed, it will not just be the result of concerns about the administration’s response to the coronavirus. Mr. Grogan fought regularly with Mr. Azar over efforts to lower prescription drug prices, an issue Mr. Trump sees as central to his health agenda.Mr. Trump also blamed Mr. Azar for aggressively pushing for a partial ban on flavored e-cigarettes, a decision the president made in January and then quickly regretted, advisers said. He berated Mr. Azar about it in a call on Jan. 16 in front of his political advisers.Mr. Azar’s well-documented battles with Ms. Verma now extend to which of them is seen as controlling the distribution of congressionally approved money to health care providers. While Mr. Azar attended the funeral for his father this month, officials in Mr. Pence’s office signed off on Ms. Verma making the announcement, a White House official said. The official said that Mr. Pence was acting out of a desire to get the money out the door, not to slight Mr. Azar.In recent days, the White House installed Mr. Caputo, a longtime Trump loyalist with no background in health care, as the top communications official at the Department of Health and Human Services, an attempt to manage how Mr. Azar and his staff are interacting with reporters.