JetBlue Bars Passenger Who Flew With Coronavirus
By Sarah MervoshA passenger who flew on a JetBlue flight from New York to West Palm Beach, Fla., on Wednesday night learned midair that he had tested positive for the coronavirus, officials said, raising questions about possible widespread exposure.The passenger, who had previously been tested for the virus and was awaiting results, got a notification toward the end of the flight that the test had come back positive. The person was overheard talking about it, and the flight crew quickly notified health officials on the ground, JetBlue confirmed on Thursday.“JetBlue had no prior indication that this customer had or may have had coronavirus,” the airline said in a statement.The flight, which departed from John F. Kennedy International Airport with 114 people on board, landed at Palm Beach International Airport around 8:30 p.m., with medical workers rushing to a call at the airport shortly after, officials said.Another passenger on board, Scott Rodman, told CNBC that the plane idled on the tarmac for about two hours before health officials told some passengers that a man seated nearby had tested positive for the coronavirus.“From what we were told, he had been tested for the virus two days ago and got a text message on the plane while he was on the plane,” said Mr. Rodman, who was flying to Florida to visit his parents.“It’s kind of wild,” he said. “If you’ve gotten tested and you think there might be something wrong, to get on an airplane is crazy.”By Thursday night, JetBlue had barred the passenger from flying on the airline again. The airline said in a statement that the passenger had boarded the flight “knowing he was awaiting results for a coronavirus test without disclosing it,” putting employees and officials “in an unsettling situation that could have been easily avoided.” The passenger, who was not identified, could not be reached for comment. It was unclear whether the passenger had been instructed not to travel. Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Health officials had begun an “extensive epidemiological investigation,” the Florida Department of Health said in a statement.Anyone who had close contact with the passenger was being asked to monitor themselves for symptoms. The passenger who tested positive was in isolation as of Thursday, the department said.Passengers from that flight came through Palm Beach International Airport in Concourse A, which was shut down for cleaning on Thursday. The airport was otherwise operating normally, a spokeswoman said.At J.F.K., employees cleaned the gate, security checkpoints, kiosks, restrooms and “and any other area the passenger went through based on security camera footage,” according to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the region’s airports.