On Politics: An Eye Toward Opening for Business
Good morning and welcome to On Politics, a daily political analysis of the 2020 elections based on reporting by New York Times journalists.Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.Separate groups of governors — one on the East Coast, one on the West — announced on Monday that they would be working together as they eventually reopen their economies. Hours earlier, President Trump wrote on Twitter that a decision on when “to open up the states” was the White House’s to make. And certainly, any change in federal recommendations will carry weight across the country. But Gov. Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania, a Democrat, said Trump had missed his chance to take the reins. “Seeing as we had the responsibility for closing the state down, I think we probably have the primary responsibility for opening it up,” Wolf said. The governors, all Democrats except for Charlie Baker of Massachusetts, said they would work together on regional frameworks but continue to make decisions state by state.Joe Biden received Bernie Sanders’s endorsement yesterday, and he also won the last election they’ll fight as rivals (though there’s always 2024!). The results from last week’s contentious Wisconsin elections were finally reported on Monday: Biden won over 60 percent of the vote in the Democratic primary. It was yet another sign of his strength — at least against Sanders — in the Midwest, a region where he will need to do well come November.Wisconsin’s election took place only because Republican officials in the State Legislature and a conservative State Supreme Court refused to postpone it amid the coronavirus pandemic. But after insisting on moving ahead, they may now have buyer’s remorse: On Monday, the most closely watched state-level race on the ballot went Democrats’ way. Jill Karofsky, a liberal Circuit Court judge, unseated the incumbent, Justice Daniel Kelly, to win a seat on the Wisconsin Supreme Court. With Ms. Karofsky on the court, conservatives will hold only a four-to-three majority during a crucial election year, when the bench is almost guaranteed to see more voting-rights cases. Her victory also demonstrated Democrats’ ability to turn out voters and effectively wield vote-by-mail efforts in a key presidential battleground. Republicans in Congress want to quickly pass a $250 billion expansion of the small business loan program set up under last month’s stimulus bill. With the Senate away, any amendment would have to pass by a consensus vote. But Democrats have refused to get behind the expansion if it doesn’t include additional money for state and local governments, hospitals, food assistance and coronavirus testing. The loan program, known as the Paycheck Protection Program, is on track to rapidly run out of money — but states, too, are on the verge of amassing large budget shortfalls if they do not receive further federal assistance.Dr. Anthony Fauci listened as President Trump spoke during the coronavirus briefing at the White House on Monday. Sanders endorsed Biden in a split-screen video appearance on Monday, opting for a quick display of Democratic unity over a drawn-out public jostling for power in the lead-up to the party’s convention.“We need you in the White House,” Sanders said. “And I will do all that I can to make that happen.”The endorsement came much faster than it did in 2016, when Sanders waited until July to back Hillary Clinton’s candidacy. Biden’s campaign hopes it will help allay concerns about his candidacy on the party’s left wing.Sanders and Biden made a point of demonstrating mutual respect and affection on Monday as they announced the introduction of six working groups aimed at finding common ground on policy. “The task is for them to develop creative new ideas and proposals,” Biden said, “and we’re looking forward to turning that work into positive change for the country.” Our reporter Sydney Ember has covered the Sanders campaign over the past year, and she took the time to answer a few questions about the endorsement and its potential impact.Sanders dropped out of the race last week, and he endorsed Biden just a few days later. That’s a very different situation than in 2016, when he withheld his endorsement of Clinton until just weeks before the Democratic convention. What was different for Sanders this time?A few things! Like many Democratic voters, Sanders was determined to defeat President Trump, whom he has called the “most dangerous president” in modern American history. After losing a string of primaries, and once Biden indicated that he was willing to move in Sanders’s direction on some key policies, Sanders realized that the best way to unify the Democratic Party and beat Trump in November was to drop out of the race. Another difference: Unlike his relationship with Clinton, Sanders and Biden are actually friends.Sanders views himself as being associated with a leftist movement that seeks to rid private money from politics and to elevate working-class concerns. He’s not your typical Democratic Party loyalist. How does his decision to endorse Biden dovetail with his efforts to build an anti-corporate political movement?Some of his supporters will certainly view it that way. Sanders has acknowledged that he and Biden do not see eye to eye on some issues that have become litmus tests for the progressive left. But his decision to drop out and endorse Biden was about doing what he could to help beat Trump, rather than watch the country suffer from what he views as even worse. On a related note, when he dropped out, he said his campaign was over but the political movement he started was not. So while he may have had to compromise this time to beat Trump, he views a potential Biden presidency as at least a step in the right direction.Biden and Sanders revealed that their teams have been working together over the past few weeks to create a few different policy task forces. What is the function of these groups, and do they have the potential to really play a part in shaping the Biden campaign’s platform looking ahead to the general election?Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.That is one of the big questions right now. During the endorsement announcement, Sanders and Biden said they were creating task forces on six issues: the economy, education, immigration, health care, criminal justice and climate change. Biden’s campaign said that the groups would include “policy experts and leaders that represent the diverse viewpoints of the Democratic Party,” and promised updates on the groups’ progress. You have to think that Sanders at least believes that these groups will help shape the Biden campaign’s platform, given that their formation was an important part of his endorsement announcement.Biden told Sanders on Monday, “I am going to need you not just to win the campaign, but to govern.” It’s still early, but do we have a sense of whether Sanders might in fact be asked to play a role in a Biden administration? If so, does he have his eye on any particular positions?I have not gotten any indication at this point that Sanders wants to serve in a Biden administration. But in this crazy world, anything is possible.On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.