Rand Paul’s Positive Coronavirus Test Sets the (Still Meeting) Senate on Edge
By Catie EdmondsonWASHINGTON — In another workplace, in another town, the news that a colleague who, days and even hours before testing positive for the novel coronavirus, had been dining and meeting and working out alongside his co-workers might have spurred some drastic measures.Not so in Congress.Senator Rand Paul’s announcement on Sunday that he had tested positive for the virus did little to alter the course of business on Monday in the Senate, where lawmakers continued to meet, spar and vote as leaders and top administration officials worked frantically to negotiate the largest economic stimulus measure in modern history.As states, cities and employers around the country direct Americans to stay at home and shelter in place to slow the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, the Senate — nearly half of whose members are 65 and older — continues to defy the recommendations of public health experts. Mr. Paul’s diagnosis, which prompted two other Republican senators to quarantine themselves, only underscored the danger of the situation.“It is naïve for us to believe that this is the end of the challenge to our membership,” said Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the second-ranking Democrat, imploring his colleagues to shutter the Senate and institute remote voting, an idea that has been resisted by congressional leaders in both parties. “We should not be physically present on this floor at this moment — we know better.”Below the surface, Mr. Paul’s diagnosis prompted fear and anger inside the Capitol. Aides in the Kentucky Republican’s Washington office were anxious and outraged by the senator’s decision to continue working after learning he had potentially been exposed, without telling staff members who could have become infected, according to a person familiar with the situation who insisted on anonymity to describe internal discussions.Two Republican senators who had dined with Mr. Paul left the Capitol and quarantined themselves as a precaution. And those left in the building on Monday were clearly uneasy as their impassioned pleas for action became freighted with a certain grim subtext.“We don’t have another day! We don’t have another hour,” said an outraged Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, imploring Democrats to allow a relief package that was still under negotiation to move forward quickly. “We don’t have another minute to delay acting.”Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, announced that her husband, John Bessler, had tested positive for the virus and was hospitalized with pneumonia in Virginia, receiving oxygen to help him breathe. Ms. Klobuchar said she would not enter quarantine or get tested because she had not been in the same place with her husband for two weeks and was outside the 14-day threshold for getting sick.Mr. Paul, 57 and a former practicing eye doctor, was informed two weekends ago that he had attended a fund-raiser in Kentucky with two individuals who later tested positive for the disease, a warning that sent a handful of other prominent elected officials into self-quarantine out of caution. Mr. Paul, whose office said he has shown no symptoms, did not, but he apparently did obtain a test, and his positive result on Sunday made him the first senator to announce that he had contracted the virus.The news that Mr. Paul had maintained his normal schedule for days after getting tested — dining with his colleagues at conference lunches, voting on the Senate floor and taking a swim in the senators-only pool just hours before he received his results — ricocheted through the Capitol, rattling and angering the network of lawmakers and aides who have worked late hours for days in close quarters, and plan to continue doing so for the foreseeable future.“He is a physician himself; he’s able to do his own risk assessment,” Senator Kevin Cramer, Republican of North Dakota, told reporters. “Evidently, he miscalculated.”Mr. Paul came under withering criticism from some colleagues — although most expressed their outrage only privately — and on Monday, he sought to defend himself. His account, which said that he got tested last Monday after arriving in Washington from Kentucky, only underscored the likelihood that he had exposed other senators to the illness.“The nature of Covid-19 put me — and us all — in a Catch-22 situation,” Mr. Paul said. “I didn’t fit the criteria for testing or quarantine. I had no symptoms and no specific encounter with a Covid-19 positive person.”He continued: “For those who want to criticize me for lack of quarantine, realize that if the rules on testing had been followed to a tee, I would never have been tested and would still be walking around the halls of the Capitol. The current guidelines would not have called for me to get tested nor quarantined. It was my extra precaution, out of concern for my damaged lung, that led me to get tested.”Mr. Paul continues to be “asymptomatic,” his statement said.The recriminations have spread to Mr. Paul’s own Washington office.His aides had never been told Mr. Paul might have been exposed to the virus or had been tested for it, according to a person familiar with the situation, and some began to fear that they could have contracted it and spread it to their friends and family before the office began working remotely, days after Mr. Paul attended the fund-raiser. Mr. Paul attended the fund-raiser on a Saturday and arrived in Washington the next Monday evening. His office closed to work remotely three days later.Senior officials in Mr. Paul’s Washington office told their staffs that none of them were at risk, the person said. But the aides remained livid that they were informed of Mr. Paul’s exposure only minutes before their office publicly announced his positive test results.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Despite the panic prompted by Mr. Paul’s announcement, on Monday, debate on the Senate floor proceeded mostly as usual — albeit in more fiery terms — with lawmakers filing into the chamber to vote and sitting in their desks next to one another. But the specter of the coronavirus weighed heavily over the proceedings.As Mr. Durbin concluded a speech with his call for remote voting, Senator Jim Risch, Republican of Idaho, approached him. Both men kept their arms crossed, and Mr. Durbin slowly backed away step by step as they spoke, creating more and more distance between them.Mr. Paul’s announcement appeared to have won over some converts for the idea of remote voting. Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who had previously shrugged off the suggestion, took to Twitter to offer his support for the idea.“We should make this change before the Senate leaves town,” Mr. Graham wrote.There is no indication that House or Senate leaders are moving toward doing so. A report released Monday night by Representative Jim McGovern, Democrat of Massachusetts and the chairman of the House Rules Committee, underscored the hurdles — both technical and legal — such a move would create, and instead recommended using existing practices, like adopting legislation by unanimous consent.For now, senators are maintaining their routine — albeit from a substantial distance, and under considerably more stress.“I’d like to suggest to my friends on both sides of the aisle that we first assume the appropriate distance,” Mr. Durbin said on Monday as tempers flared on the Senate floor, “and then secondly, take a deep breath.”