Sanders and Biden Cancel Events as Coronavirus Fears Upend Primary
By Sydney Ember, Annie Karni and Maggie HabermanThe nation’s presidential race entered an unpredictable new phase on Tuesday after the two leading Democratic candidates canceled big primary-night campaign events because of worries about the coronavirus, and Vice President Mike Pence said that the future of President Trump’s signature rallies would be decided on a “a day-to-day basis.” The disruption to traditional campaigning was the first powerful sign that the virus is changing American politics, coming at the height of a primary season as Senator Bernie Sanders and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. battle for the Democratic nomination. Mr. Sanders especially relies on huge rallies to energize his base of younger voters — the kind of barnstorming he needs to halt Mr. Biden’s growing momentum in the race.Mr. Sanders, quickly followed by Mr. Biden, called off events scheduled for Ohio just hours before they were set to begin and as the candidates awaited the results of voting in six other states. Gov. Mike DeWine of Ohio, a Republican, had asked earlier Tuesday for all major indoor events to be canceled. The Sanders and Biden campaigns indicated they would evaluate future events; the Biden campaign added one for Tuesday night in Philadelphia. As the anxiety built, the Democratic National Committee announced Tuesday night that there would be no live audience and virtually no traveling members of the news media at the party’s presidential debate on Sunday in Phoenix. The new uncertainty about political rallies and face-to-face contact with voters has the potential to remake the entire presidential campaign. Not only will Democrats need mass rallies to help unite the party, after a bruising primary race, behind a nominee and a policy agenda. It is Mr. Trump, more than any American leader in modern politics, who has used mega-rallies to motivate his supporters, dominate cable news airwaves with coverage and feed his own ego and morale.In recent days, Mr. Trump has complained to advisers about the toll the coronavirus is taking on his efforts to campaign publicly, and has continued to insist in private, as he has done in public, that worries about the virus are being overblown, according to two people familiar with his comments. Following his lead, the campaign has told reporters that all of its activity was “proceeding as normal.”But several people close to Mr. Trump have suggested to his campaign and White House officials that he not go ahead with rallies, a person close to Mr. Trump said. It was unclear how forceful any of them had been in pushing him away from them.Since his 2016 campaign, Mr. Trump has left the glad-handing at diners and the round-table discussions to surrogates, focusing solely on rallies to communicate his message and connect with supporters. Any slowdown or suspension of rallies would deprive him of a major political weapon at a time when concerns about the virus — as well as the damage to a national economy that is Mr. Trump’s calling card in the 2020 race — could further alienate some disaffected Republicans and independents from the Trump camp.For the first time in months, Mr. Trump has no rally scheduled for the coming weeks. His last campaign rally took place on March 2 in Charlotte, N.C., on the eve of Super Tuesday. But on Tuesday evening, his campaign announced a “Catholics for Trump” event at a convention center in Milwaukee on March 19. It is not technically a rally, but two campaign officials described it as a test run to see how people reacted to the president holding a large-scale event.Asked at a briefing on Tuesday evening whether the Trump campaign would continue to hold rallies, Mr. Pence said, “That’ll be a decision that’s made literally on a day-to-day basis.”The cancellations by Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders came on a critical day of voting, as Mr. Biden cemented his front-runner status with victories in the battleground state of Michigan as well as in Missouri and Mississippi, further denting Mr. Sanders’s hopes at a comeback in the race.The one-two punch of the cancellations was not as unexpected as it was jarring. As the public has grown increasingly wary of the coronavirus outbreak, it has largely been business as usual for Mr. Sanders and Mr. Biden, who have continued shaking the hands of supporters. But on Tuesday afternoon, that quickly changed. “Out of concern for public health and safety, we are canceling tonight’s rally in Cleveland,” said Mike Casca, a Sanders campaign spokesman. “We are heeding the public warnings from Ohio state officials, who have communicated concern about holding large, indoor events during the coronavirus outbreak. Senator Sanders would like to express his regret to the thousands of Ohioans who had planned to attend the event tonight.”Mr. Casca added, “All future Bernie 2020 events will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.”Almost immediately, the Biden campaign said it, too, was canceling its evening event in Cleveland.“In accordance with guidance from public officials and out of an abundance of caution, our rally in Cleveland, Ohio tonight is canceled,” Mr. Biden’s deputy campaign manager, Kate Bedingfield, said on Twitter. “We will continue to consult with public health officials and public health guidance and make announcements about future events in the coming days.”Mr. Biden’s campaign later announced that he would deliver primary night remarks from Philadelphia, where his campaign is based. Some of Mr. Biden’s allies believe this moment offers the chance to highlight his experience as a former vice president, and to cast him as a steady hand — in contrast to Mr. Trump, the thinking goes — at a deeply uncertain and high-stakes time. Mr. Biden was slated to begin another intense stretch of campaigning starting on Thursday, with planned visits in delegate-heavy Florida, Illinois and Arizona before the March 17 contests in those states. The campaign said it was canceling a planned rally on Thursday in Tampa, Fla., but the full fate of Mr. Biden’s swing was unclear on Tuesday.There were some indications earlier on Tuesday that the coronavirus could begin to affect scheduled political events. In the afternoon, Mr. DeWine wrote on Twitter that he was asking for major indoor events in his state to be canceled.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Sanders had also told reporters outside a polling place in Dearborn Heights, Mich., that he would abide by guidance from local public health officials when planning his campaign events.“What we are doing wherever we go, whenever we do rallies, we consult with public health officials because the last thing we want to do is put anybody in danger,” Mr. Sanders said. “We will not do anything that public health officials do not think is right.” Mr. Sanders also held a round-table discussion on Monday at a hotel at the Detroit airport where he and public health experts talked about the coronavirus.Until Tuesday, though, Mr. Sanders had continued to hold enormous rallies, a signature part of his campaign but one that was at odds with the quarantines and public directives from officials across the country to avoid large public events. Should Mr. Sanders be unable to stage rallies, it would drastically change how he campaigns at a critical juncture: After a lackluster Super Tuesday and losing in Michigan, he is now chasing Mr. Biden with increasing desperation in the delegate race. It was Mr. Sanders himself who called off his Cleveland rally, his campaign said.Any announcement from the Trump campaign about a formal rally would come less than 24 hours after a public health official on Mr. Trump’s coronavirus task force had hinted that there could be dangers to holding one. The rally the campaign had indicated it would announce on Tuesday was to take place in Florida at the end of the month, according to a person familiar with the planning. That rally is more than two weeks away, which could give officials a better chance to monitor the progression of the virus across the country, while also allowing them to claim they are maintaining normal operations.“If you want to talk about large gatherings in a place where you have community spread, I think that’s a judgment call,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s leading expert on infectious diseases, said at a briefing on Monday when asked specifically about whether presidential candidates should continue holding rallies. “And if someone decides they want to cancel it, I wouldn’t publicly criticize it.”Earlier on Tuesday, Mr. Trump continued to play down the threat of the virus. “Be calm,” he told people. “It’s really working out.”Reid J. Epstein and Katie Glueck contributed reporting. 