‘It’s a Weird Feeling’: Seattle Hunkers Down Amid Coronavirus Outbreak
Supported byBy Karen Weise and Kirk JohnsonSEATTLE — Just after dawn on Thursday morning, a Microsoft shuttle bus idled at its regular stop in North Seattle — but no passengers were there to board.The day went on like that: Coffee shop sales were way down. Schools were closed in one suburban area. The downtown was oddly quiet. Traffic was a breeze.People were hunkering down.A new reality has set in for the Seattle area, the first region in the United States where the authorities have issued sweeping recommendations that people stay home to slow the spread of coronavirus.“It is a weird feeling, being ground zero of this thing,” said Anastasia Scrimgeour, a driver for Lyft and Uber who said her income had dropped by half since a week ago, when a wave of reports of coronavirus cases began in the area. “Everyone is scared of Seattle now.”A day earlier, county officials had urged people to telecommute rather than go to work, and recommended that people 60 or older stay in their homes. People with medical conditions, as well as pregnant women, were also advised not to go out. The city is hardly a ghost town, Ms. Scrimgeour said, but there were definitely fewer people out and about.“It was so quick,” she said. “Everything just happened in a few days.”In Washington State, 13 people have died of coronavirus. More than 60 other people have been treated for the virus in the state, leading state officials to declare an emergency.And in pockets all around Seattle, people were heeding the advice of officials and staying in. Microsoft, Amazon and many other top employers told their employees to work from home. The South Lake Union area, where thousands of tech workers typically fill the streets, was mostly empty. Parking spaces usually all but impossible to find on a weekday were wide open.“You are starting to feel people are avoiding public areas,” said Angelica Salazar, who brought her baby daughter to a library story time on Thursday.Story time, usually packed, was not. “Life still has to go on,” Ms. Salazar said.Michelle Rose, who works the front desk at a hotel west of the city, said she had seen store shelves emptied.“People are staying home, freaking out,” she said. “We’ve got a whole folder for it — people that are canceling their reservations.”Jason Foafoa, a finish carpenter, proceeded to work as usual, to a 40-story apartment building, its upper floors still skeletal as the framing and walls go up. There was a change, though, he said. Seattle’s increasingly snarled traffic has all but disappeared.“It’s weird,” he said.Two women walked down a sidewalk carrying big computer monitors in their arms. They were heading home to work, as their employer has suggested until at least the end of March.Their office of about 200 people was down to only a few, some of them packing up their stuff.At Cascade Coffee Works, located on the ground floor of one of Amazon’s buildings and on a typical weekday full of Amazon workers, the lines had vanished.“Sales are down 50 percent today,” said Zach Cook, 27, the head roaster at Seattle Coffee Works, which has four locations in the city, including Cascade Coffee.Mr. Cook said the company’s other cafes were seeing a slowdown in business. “But it’s nothing drastic like this,” he said.He said there had been no talk of reducing hours or jobs. “Not yet, but likely,” he said.Kim Kennedy, 26, who works as an aide in a physical therapy clinic in Seattle, had her work hours cut this week, from 36 to 28, as scheduled patients canceled their appointments.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Ms. Kennedy said she was not terribly worried about the virus, although she was washing her hands more often as a precaution. But she did think twice when a recent therapy client casually mentioned being at a hospital that she thought cared for patients with the virus.“I just said to myself, ‘I’ll not touch anything you touch,’” she said.Pike Place Market seemed slower than usual for a weekday at noon, though it still had many visitors, strolling past the fish market vendors and flower stalls, buying slices of pizza or bowls of chowder.“Don’t touch the wall!” shouted Theresa Ray as a friend leaned up to pin a piece of chewed gum on to what is widely regarded one of the city’s most disgusting — and in the best of circumstances, least sanitary — tourist attractions: the Gum Wall. In an alley near the market, mashing a piece of gum to an already covered wall has become a tourist rite of passage.“It’s gross, but I’m not afraid I’m going to get coronavirus,” said Ms. Ray, a retail assistant manager from eastern Washington who was visiting the city on Thursday after driving three hours for a concert on Wednesday.Alexis Plutowski, 22, a nursing assistant who was visiting the city on Thursday, said she thought the anxious response to the virus had outstripped what she viewed as the real risk.“It’s normal with something that people haven’t heard of before,” Ms. Plutowski said. “But more people are dying from the flu than this.”At one public library, most tables were occupied but not full. Some people stayed away, while others came in search of internet access to telecommute or for public health information, Darth Nielsen, a regional manager, said.