In Pandemic, Justice Dept. Seeks Video Court Hearings and Home Detention
By Charlie SavageWASHINGTON — Invoking the coronavirus crisis, the Justice Department has asked Congress to let more federal inmates serve their time at home and to steer scarce masks and testing kits to federal prisons ahead of other agencies, according to draft legislation submitted last week to congressional leaders.The department has also asked Congress to relax speedy trial rules and expand opportunities for law enforcement officials to use video conferencing for certain preliminary federal criminal and detention proceedings, like arraignments for newly arrested people.“Authorizing the general use of teleconferencing for these preliminary proceedings would ensure that defendants are able to access courts shortly after their arrest,” the Justice Department wrote. “It also would limit any disruptions caused by the coronavirus.”Those proposals are among a handful that the Trump administration has told congressional leaders that it is making a priority — and that lawmakers of both parties are considering enacting — after both Republicans and Democrats reacted skeptically to more sweeping ideas in the proposal, according to congressional aides.Those ideas that appear to be dead on arrival included a plan to empower President Trump or his successors to eliminate legal protections for asylum seekers. That would amount to a permanent change to immigration law that would require no finding of any connection to a public health risk.It is not clear what Congress will do with the proposals, several of which Politico first reported. As the Senate fights over a nearly $2 trillion stimulus package, some of the Justice Department’s ideas could end up attached to it, one congressional aide said, while another said that none of the proposals were likely to be part of the current round of legislation.But the pandemic is growing worse, and history has shown that Congress can sometimes rush to enact sudden and major expansions of government power during a crisis as lawmakers feel pressure to show they are responding, as when it abruptly passed the USA Patriot Act after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.Another part of the Justice Department’s proposal calls for empowering Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. to pause the statute of limitations during a national emergency, and similarly permitting chief judges of district courts to suspend deadlines for “pre-arrest, post-arrest, pretrial, trial and post-trial procedures in criminal and juvenile proceedings and all civil process and proceedings.”But lawmakers of both parties greeted with skepticism the notion of extended detentions without judicial process even if the court system was disrupted, according to congressional aides briefed on the negotiations.Still, one aide said, lawmakers are considering easing some of the requirements of the Speedy Trial Act — which generally lets defendants demand a trial within 70 days of arraignment — if the coronavirus pandemic makes it impossible to hold in-person trials for a while, including by sequestering 12 jurors in the same room for deliberations.Lawmakers are also said to be open to another part of the Justice Department proposal for the Bureau of Prisons. It would give the bureau the power to expand the use of home confinement — now capped at 10 percent of an inmate’s term or six months — and prioritize steering masks and testing kits to federal prisons.Federal prisons officials are confronting the nationwide shortage of masks and other personal protective equipment for medical personnel, the department wrote, labeling the shortfall a “vulnerability” as it seeks preferential status.“B.O.P. is currently competing and engaging the same landscape of vendors as all other federal agencies and private entities,” the proposal said.The Justice Department’s spokeswoman, Kerri Kupec, said on Twitter on Sunday in response to the Politico report that the proposal was prompted by a congressional request for suggestions and that department officials were seeking to empower judges, not the executive branch.“Bottom line: The proposed legislative text confers powers upon judges,” she wrote. “It does not confer new powers upon the executive branch. These provisions are designed to empower the courts to ensure the fair and effective administration of justice.”However, two congressional aides said they were unaware of any request from Congress going to the Justice Department, and understood that the department itself had decided on its own to ask all of its components for ideas and sent them over.Justice Department representatives did not respond to follow-up questions about who asked the department to come up with ideas for new laws because of the pandemic, nor about the justifications for the request to confer new powers on the executive branch over asylum matters, which her statement did not address.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Under that part of the draft legislation — said to be quickly dismissed by lawmakers — presidents could exempt immigrants from eligibility to apply for asylum and from a domestic legal rule forbidding the federal government from sending them home to countries where they are likely to face persecution, which is also a requirement of international law.The proposal would eliminate those legal protections not only for migrants found to be infected with the coronavirus or other communicable diseases of “public health significance,” but also to any others who are separately “subject to a presidential proclamation suspending and limiting the entry of aliens into the United States.”The Trump administration has been trying to curb asylum claims at the southwestern border for the past three years, and last week it developed plans to use the pandemic to shut down that process under the president’s existing authority — a move that is certain to face legal challenge.The proposal to expand Mr. Trump’s powers over asylum law would be a “really dangerous weapon” to put in his hands, placing at greater risk people who come to the United States seeking protection, said Omar Jadwat, the director of the American Civil Liberties Union’s Immigrants’ Rights Project.