‘Overwhelmed and Frustrated’: What It’s Like Trying to Get an Abortion in Texas
By Sabrina TaverniseThe 31-year-old from Houston knew she did not want another baby. She already had three — her youngest, a boy, was just 6 months old. And she had just been laid off from her job in a medical billing office, another casualty of America’s growing unemployment crisis.So she scheduled an abortion at a local clinic. But when she arrived for her appointment four weeks ago, the doors were locked and a sign was taped inside the glass: The clinic was closed.Abortions in Texas were off after the state included them on a list of medical procedures that were not essential and needed to be postponed during the coronavirus pandemic.The woman, who asked that her name not be used to protect her privacy, walked back to her car, took out her phone and immediately started Googling her options.Her search would eventually involve four states and six clinics. Last week, she was 18 weeks pregnant and considering driving nine hours to a clinic in Wichita, Kan., with her infant son in the back seat.“I’m just kind of overwhelmed and frustrated and stressed,” the woman said last week. “I just know I can’t handle another baby. I just know. I know physically, emotionally, financially.”The fight over abortion rights, rather than receding into the background during the pandemic, has intensified as a number of states have banned the procedure in recent weeks as part of emergency measures to fight the virus.In at least seven states across the South and the Midwest, authorities have included abortion as a nonessential medical procedure, arguing that postponement is necessary to preserve medical and protective equipment. Abortion rights groups say the pandemic is being used as a pretense to restrict abortion, and have sued to stop the states, which on Tuesday included Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Ohio, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Texas.This weekend, the dispute in Texas reached the Supreme Court, with the clinics asking for relief. But a surprise ruling in an appellate court late Monday night restored some abortion access in the state, bringing the battle back to the lower courts.“It has become a day-by-day, week-to-week fight,” Alexis McGill Johnson, acting president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, said in a statement.Joe Pojman, who heads the Texas Alliance for Life, said in an email that “abortion providers should not get special treatment that puts health care providers fighting Covid-19 and their patients at unnecessary risk.”Getting an abortion, not easy in many states under ordinary circumstances, has become even harder in recent weeks.Women following social distancing rules now wait in their cars for appointments at clinics, where anti-abortion protesters sometimes yell at them. Many are recently out of work and no longer have child care, which means that getting to appointments — and paying for them — is more difficult. Women in states or cities with stay-at-home orders are nervous they will be stopped by the police on the way to clinics.Then came the bans. One of the first was in Texas. Authorities there said abortions could wait. But the clinics, and much of the medical community, say that abortion is time-sensitive and that it could be months before emergency measures are lifted. Abortion rights groups brought the state to court and legal chaos ensued on the ground in the clinics.Dr. Amna Dermish had just finished a surgical abortion in a Planned Parenthood clinic in Austin when she got a call from her administrator saying that the governor’s order, which had been blocked briefly by a federal judge, was back in effect. The 261 patients they had called to cancel appointments — and then in attempts to reschedule — had to be reached again in less than 24 hours.“I had to sit down when I got that call,” Dr. Dermish said last week. “I couldn’t believe it.”Dr. Dermish said she had to tell the 10 remaining patients at the clinic, all waiting for ultrasounds, that she could not schedule their abortions. One woman had a diagnosed fetal anomaly. Another was starting school to become an ultrasound technician. Dr. Dermish said they referred women to clinics outside the state, but also warned them that travel during the pandemic could be risky.For weeks, even medication abortion was banned — a common type involving pills that is done early in pregnancy and uses one single nonsterile glove, Dr. Dermish said. The unexpected ruling Monday night from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit undoes that restriction, at least for now.But lawyers for clinics say that the ban remains on nearly all surgical abortions, a substantial portion of the state’s total, and that the Fifth Circuit is still actively weighing the case.Overwhelmingly, abortions happen in clinics, not hospitals, but the clinics have also changed their rules to account for the coronavirus. A 24-year-old college student from Arlington, Texas, said in court papers that before an ultrasound she sat alone in her car in the parking lot of a Fort Worth clinic for two hours. She said protesters stood about 10 feet away with signs “and screamed at me and other patients.”The night before she was scheduled to go in for her medication abortion, she got a call from the clinic saying her appointment had been canceled. She ended up driving 12 hours to Denver with a friend and wiping down surfaces in the cheap Airbnb they stayed in. On the way back they drove into the night.“We didn’t want to take breaks or rest because I was worried about having my abortion in the car,” she said in court papers filed by lawyers for clinics in Texas.Not every clinic closed right away. The Houston mother found one that squeezed her in for an ultrasound. But when she parked in front of another clinic early the next morning, hoping to be seen for an abortion, it never opened.She had tried to be careful. In December, she had her tubes tied. But last month, a home test showed she was pregnant.When the pandemic began, she had been trying to find her feet financially. She had signed up for weekend classes toward her real estate license, hoping to earn extra income to supplement child support from the father of her children, who works in a plumbing supply store.But now here she was, more than 15 weeks pregnant, making dozens of calls a day to apply for unemployment — last Tuesday her cellphone showed 40 calls by 9 a.m., mostly met with busy signals — while looking for an abortion clinic in another state.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Other women seeking abortions said they could not afford to travel out of state and were looking for ways to end their pregnancy on their own — by illegally buying an abortion pill online. An 18-year-old in San Antonio who is pregnant and wants an abortion said her job at Kentucky Fried Chicken was reduced to 10 hours a week, from more than 40.“I am barely able to get the basics,” she said on Facebook Messenger, declining to give her name to maintain her privacy.She said she was sheltering in place with her grandfather, who was in ill health and did not know she was pregnant.“I can’t tell anyone about my situation because it’s just too scary at this point,” she said. “I’m not sure what to do. I feel mostly stuck, lost and alone.”When abortion stopped in Texas last month, Julie Burkhart, the founder and chief executive of Trust Women, which operates abortion clinics in Oklahoma City and Wichita, received a flood of new patients.On March 24, her two clinics had a total of 90 appointments, she said, up from about 25 on a normal day. About half the patients were from out of state, she said, many from Texas.“Our phones started ringing off the hook,” she said.One of the calls was from the mother in Houston. She was worried about finding a clinic. But she was also worried about the virus.She looked at West Virginia, which had an abortion clinic, and not very many virus cases. But it was too far and too expensive to fly. She settled on Oklahoma City because she could drive there in six hours. But as she was talking to Ms. Burkhart’s clinic, Oklahoma followed in the footsteps of Texas. (A judge has since allowed most abortions to continue in Oklahoma, and the state has appealed.)So the Houston mother scheduled an appointment at the Trust Women clinic in Wichita for 8 a.m. days later. But she knew she would need someone to drive with her, so she could tend to her 6-month-old. Wichita was nine hours away, too far for her mother. Her sister, who was still managing the night shift at a vitamin plant, could not take time off.“I was going in circles,” the woman said. “Every time I tried something, it’s like I found a solution, and then it was like, nope.”Last week she found a fund that would help pay for her travel. On Wednesday, she, her mother and her 6-month-old flew to Louisville, Ky., where there was another clinic willing to take her.