Kobe Bryant Helicopter Crash Wreckage Shows No Evidence of Engine Failure
By Nicholas Bogel-BurroughsSANTA ANA, Calif. — Just before it crashed, the helicopter carrying the basketball star Kobe Bryant and eight others hurtled toward the ground at faster than 4,000 feet per minute — twice the rate the authorities had originally reported — forming a two-foot-deep crater when it slammed into a hill, investigators said in a preliminary report released on Friday.The helicopter, which showed no clear signs of serious engine failure, was traveling at about 184 miles per hour and fighting to clear low-hanging clouds when it crashed close to a mountain bike trail near Calabasas, Calif., the National Transportation Safety Board said in the report.Most of the wreckage came to rest 127 feet away from the main point of impact, investigators found. A tree branch about 30 feet ahead of where the helicopter hit was sliced cleanly in three different spots, it said.The report represented the N.T.S.B’s initial fact-finding on the Jan. 26 crash. It focused primarily on the layout of the crash site, the pilot’s last communications with air traffic controllers, witnesses who lived near the crash site and reports of weather, which contributed to diminished visibility along much of the helicopter’s route across the San Fernando Valley and the Santa Monica Mountains.A final report, with the N.T.S.B.’s best assessment of what caused the crash, could take 12 to 24 months, agency officials have said.But Friday’s initial findings did seem to play down the possibility of engine failure as a cause. The two engines recovered from the wreckage showed no clear evidence of major internal failure, the report said.Before crashing, the pilot, Ara Zobayan, had requested special permission to fly through the low-visibility control zones around Burbank and Van Nuys Airport.Mr. Zobayan, an experienced pilot who had logged more than 1,200 hours in the S-76 helicopter, was certified to fly with the use of his instruments in conditions of low visibility. But the certification that the Federal Aviation Administration issued to the helicopter’s owner, Island Express Helicopters, only allows its pilots to fly visually, when they have at least a half-mile of daytime visibility and can see the ground.Seconds before he crashed, according to the report, Mr. Zobayan told a flight controller he was trying to climb to 4,000 feet in an attempt to get above the clouds.The helicopter rose to about 1,500 feet above Highway 101, which Mr. Zobayan had been trying to follow, and began a turn to the left. The helicopter, still turning, began its steep descent eight seconds later, the report said. It crashed at 9:45, about 39 minutes after it had taken off from John Wayne Airport in Santa Ana.Investigators released a preliminary report into the helicopter crash that killed Kobe Bryant, his daughter Gianna and seven others.An unidentified man told N.T.S.B. investigators that he had seen the blue-and-white helicopter fly out of clouds and roll to its left before it hit the hill about 50 feet away from him. A photograph taken by the witness and published by the N.T.S.B. shows bright orange flames and thick, dark smoke rising from the burning wreckage.Much of the helicopter, a Sikorsky S-76B outfitted to hold two pilots and eight passengers, was destroyed on impact and in the subsequent fire. But “viewable sections” of its two engines showed “no evidence of an uncontained or catastrophic internal failure,” investigators said.Investigators recovered the engines, which will be disassembled and examined further.“The cockpit was highly fragmented,” the report said. “The instrument panel was destroyed and most instruments were displaced from their panel mounts. Flight controls were fragmented and fire damaged.”The pilot was flying all eight passengers to a basketball tournament at a sports training facility that Mr. Bryant sponsored, Mamba Sports Academy, in Thousand Oaks.