Trump’s Pick to Lead Navy Assails Past Leaders and Promises Change
By Eric SchmittWASHINGTON — President Trump’s choice to be the secretary of the Navy testified on Thursday that the sea service had suffered through “rough waters” over its handling of the virus-stricken aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt and other recent episodes, largely because of poor leadership.The comments by the nominee, Kenneth J. Braithwaite, were a blunt indictment of senior civilians and admirals who have led a Navy that in recent years has been racked by scandals and accidents. He cited the “Fat Leonard” bribery scandal that tainted much of the service’s top leadership as well as two ship collisions in 2017, nine weeks apart, that together killed 17 sailors.“They are all indicative of a breakdown in the trust of those leading the service,” said Mr. Braithwaite, a Naval Academy graduate and retired one-star admiral. “It saddens me to say that the Department of the Navy is in rough waters due to many factors but primarily the failure of leadership.”He pledged to the Senate Armed Services Committee “to restore the appropriate culture in the United States Navy.” He added: “I won’t say it’s broken. I think it’s been tarnished.”Mr. Braithwaite, 59, who is currently the U.S. ambassador to Norway, also seemed to distance himself from some decisions made by Thomas B. Modly, the acting Navy secretary until last month. Over the objections of top military advisers, Mr. Modly fired Capt. Brett E. Crozier, who pleaded for help fighting the coronavirus on the Theodore Roosevelt. Mr. Modly later resigned after he criticized the crew on an ill-fated trip to the Roosevelt in Guam for its support of the deposed captain.Asked by Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, if he saw himself intervening in far-flung personnel decisions, Mr. Braithwaite said, “No, I don’t.”“Good order and discipline starts with the chain of command,” Mr. Braithwaite said. “If I’m confirmed, I’ll ensure that is understood, from the secretary’s office all the way to the smallest vessel in United States Navy.”Mr. Braithwaite, who spent 27 years on active duty and in the Navy Reserve as an aviator and public affairs officer, also told senators that he supported a decision last week by the current acting secretary of the Navy, James E. McPherson, to order a wider investigation into the events aboard the Roosevelt.That new inquiry shelved for now a recommendation by the Navy’s top admiral, Michael M. Gilday, to restore Captain Crozier to command of the Roosevelt.Mr. McPherson’s decision was interpreted by some Defense Department officials as reflecting concern among both civilian and military leaders at the Pentagon over getting on the wrong side of Mr. Trump. Captain Crozier was fired in part because of fears that Mr. Trump wanted him gone, and not knowing how the president feels about reinstating the captain has cast a shadow over the actions since.But Mr. Braithwaite indicated he had no opposition to conducting the wider inquiry, which is expected to be completed by the end of the month by Adm. Robert Burke, the vice chief of naval operations.Mr. Braithwaite said he was relying on lessons he learned preparing for and flying anti-submarine missions in the Pacific and Indian Oceans.“Whenever you’re confronted with a challenge like this, it’s best to pause, consider all the facts and then make the right decision,” Mr. Braithwaite said under questioning from Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut.Mr. Braithwaite’s meeting with senators in a near-empty hearing room on Capitol Hill under Covid-19 restrictions came as the issues surrounding the Roosevelt, the Navy’s handling of the matter and the fate of the warship all remain under intense public scrutiny.As sailors and other crew members who were quarantined on Guam return to the ship and begin preparations to return to sea, tensions have flared again between the ship’s medical personnel and Navy leadership over whether the Roosevelt is ready to go back to work in the Pacific Ocean.Meantime, Captain Crozier, who had tested positive for the coronavirus, completed his recovery and subsequent quarantine on Guam. He reported on Monday to the Pacific Fleet’s Air Forces headquarters in San Diego and is expected to remain there at least for the duration of the new investigation.Over and over, Mr. Braithwaite repeated on Thursday that his priority would be to rebuild trust up and down the chain of command, and hold those responsible accountable for any wrongdoings or misdeeds.Updated May 20, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Braithwaite reaffirmed this under questioning from Senator Tammy Duckworth, Democrat of Illinois, who asked about the extraordinary war crimes case involving a member of the Navy SEALs, Chief Petty Officer Edward Gallagher.Late last year, the service was rocked by Mr. Trump when he fired Richard V. Spencer, the last permanent Navy secretary, after Mr. Spencer publicly disagreed with the president’s intervention on behalf of Chief Gallagher.Chief Gallagher was accused of murdering a wounded captive with a hunting knife during a deployment to Iraq in 2017, and when the Navy prosecuted him, Mr. Trump intervened several times in his favor. When the chief’s court-martial ended in acquittal on most charges, Mr. Trump congratulated him and criticized the prosecutors. After the Navy demoted Chief Gallagher for the one relatively minor charge on which he was convicted, Mr. Trump reversed the demotion.The commander of Naval Special Warfare, Rear Adm. Collin P. Green, then started the formal process of taking away Chief Gallagher’s Trident pin, the symbol of the Navy commandos, and expelling him from the SEALs. But Mr. Trump overruled the move and Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper fired Mr. Spencer, who had supported the process.