With a Face Mask Photo, Melania Trump Highlights Her Husband’s Reluctance to Wear One
By Katie RogersWASHINGTON — In a message on Twitter accompanied by a picture of her face partly covered by a medical mask, Melania Trump, the first lady, urged Americans on Thursday to protect themselves from the coronavirus by wearing face coverings in public, an image all the more striking because it contrasted with her husband’s mixed messages on the subject.“As the C.D.C. continues to study the spread of the Covid-19, they’re recommending people wear cloth face coverings in public settings where social distancing measures can be difficult to maintain,” Mrs. Trump said in an accompanying video, referring to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. She cited grocery stores and pharmacies as examples.As the CDC studies the spread of #COVID-19, they recommend people wear cloth face coverings in public settings when social distancing can be hard to do. Remember, this does NOT replace the importance of social distancing. pic.twitter.com/HRaQHFgXxn“Remember,” she added, “this does not replace the importance of social distancing.”After a slow start to acknowledge the virus, Mrs. Trump has since issued a string of public service videos meant to echo public health guidelines on social distancing and hand washing.But in his lengthy televised coronavirus news briefings, President Trump offers his own interpretation of the rules: He has told reporters that he would not be interested in wearing a mask unless he deemed it important.Instead, everyone who comes into close contact with Mr. Trump must now be tested for the virus, including journalists in the White House briefing room, according to White House officials.“I don’t know, somehow sitting in the Oval Office behind that beautiful Resolute Desk,” the president told reporters on Friday, “I think wearing a face mask as I greet presidents, prime ministers, dictators, kings, queens, I don’t know. Somehow, I don’t see it for myself. I just — I just don’t. Maybe I’ll change my mind, but this will pass, and hopefully it’ll pass very quickly.”It was far from the first time that the first lady’s message differed from Mr. Trump’s, but some examples have been starker than others.In August 2017, it was Mrs. Trump who stepped forward before her husband to condemn the deadly white nationalist march in Charlottesville, Va., where one woman was killed by a white supremacist: “Our country encourages freedom of speech, but let’s communicate w/o hate in our hearts,” she tweeted after the protest turned violent. “No good comes from violence.”Mr. Trump, on the other hand, was roundly criticized for suggesting that the blame for the violence laid with people on “both sides” of the protest.With her child-focused program, BeBest, Mrs. Trump has tried to promote healthy online lifestyles and the prevention of online bullying. Mr. Trump, of course, uses Twitter as his primary battering ram against Democrats, critics and members of the news media.But in December, Mrs. Trump refused to admonish her husband for mocking Greta Thunberg, a 16-year-old climate activist, on Twitter. Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary at the time, said that the first couple “often communicate differently.”Throughout the coronavirus outbreak, the first lady has been criticized for seeming to have a different set of priorities. She encountered widespread criticism at the beginning of it for focusing on building a tennis pavilion at the White House instead of warning Americans about the spread of the virus.According to an administration official familiar with her thinking, Mrs. Trump waited until official government guidance was released to begin filming public service announcements and issuing warnings on Twitter.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.In recent days, she has been more engaged with the issue, including by fielding calls from her counterparts in France and Italy to discuss steps to defeat the virus. And after canceling the annual White House Easter Egg Roll because of coronavirus concerns, Mrs. Trump donated thousands of the event’s commemorative wooden eggs to workers at hospitals and federal agencies.She has also directed much of her own staff in the East Wing and in the White House residence to work from home. The White House calligrapher and social secretary are no longer reporting to work, for example, but chefs are still on hand to cook meals for the first family.