The Bernie Sanders Revolution Has Moved to Mom’s Couch
By Emma GoldbergWith the country in crisis mode, Melat Eskender, 19, has assumed battle position: In her parents’ living room making phone calls for Senator Bernie Sanders, with quarantine rations of Flamin’ Hot Cheetos at her side.The coronavirus outbreak has scattered college students across the country. Thousands left their campuses to return to their childhood bedrooms, as universities have announced that they are moving to remote learning and recommending, or requiring, that students leave. For many, that can mean a wistful sense of time lost with friends and school rituals missed, not to mention cabin fever. But there’s an upside, as Ms. Eskender put it: “Being isolated in my home and not having classes, it gives me time to focus on this campaign.”Ms. Eskender, a Yale freshman from Columbus, Ohio, believes that the Covid-19 pandemic has put a spotlight on Mr. Sanders’s strengths as a candidate, both in his health care-focused policy platform and leadership style. “I don’t see him as an authoritative leader, I see him as a healer,” Ms. Eskender said. “His policies and leadership are what the country need right now.”For many young Sanders supporters, recent weeks have brought a sense of angst and grief: Their preferred candidate’s shot at the nomination has rapidly declined, as the country has been swept into a public health disaster. And the coronavirus pandemic has underscored their belief in Mr. Sanders’s “Medicare for all” plan, just as his chance of election seems more elusive than ever. He is behind former Vice President Joseph R. Biden, who ended Tuesday with victories in Florida, Illinois and Arizona — and overtures to the Sanders base in remarks over a livestream from his home in Delaware. “Let me say especially to the young voters who have been inspired by Senator Sanders: I hear you.” Many of those young voters, though, aren’t so ready to move on.“It feels like everything is so dark and spiraling quickly for our country,” said Kathe McCormick-Evans, 23, a Sanders supporter in Cambridge, Mass. “Coronavirus feels really scary and uncertain and I was previously feeling a lot of hope around Bernie and the primaries. Seeing him fall in the polls is just another reminder that things are slowly falling apart.”Before the world was completely upended — a.k.a., earlier this month — Ms. McCormick-Evans defended Mr. Sanders’s merits in a “heated” group chat with family and friends who supported Senator Elizabeth Warren, in the days leading up to the Massachusetts primary. She fended off accusations that supporting Mr. Sanders was sexist, and told her mom how excited she would be to live in a country led by a Democratic Socialist. Now the pandemic feels to her like proof of the country’s leadership crisis, but the unease of the moment makes it hard to hold onto the hope she had just weeks ago, when she cast her ballot.It’s a blow to the young people fueled for months by the sense of possibility they felt in his candidacy. But a belief in the underdog is something endemic to the Sanders base, and many are intent on transferring their anxieties into action.Ruth Geye, 21, a college student in New York, was disappointed to see her senior spring cut short when New York University announced on March 9 a move to remotely hold classes. But she quickly realized that going back to Shaker Heights, Ohio, meant closer proximity to family members she can enlist in campaign work for Mr. Sanders. “My parents pride themselves on doing a lot of driving people to the polls, but given that won’t be a thing, maybe I can channel that energy into making calls for Bernie,” Ms. Geye said.For Ms. Geye, the pilgrimage home to her boomer parents was a reminder of the generational fissures that Mr. Sanders’s campaign exposed. While she was able to persuade her mom to pledge support for Mr. Sanders in the now delayed Ohio primary, it took some convincing.Earlier in the primaries, they disagreed especially on the role of female representation. Ms. Geye’s mother liked the idea of supporting “a very smart woman” like Ms. Warren, while Ms. Geye’s view on gender was more straightforward: “I truly don’t care.”She wasn’t impressed by Joe Biden’s commitment to selecting a female vice president at Sunday’s debate, the first since Ms. Warren dropped out of the race, nor deterred by Mr. Sanders’s lack of a commitment.Like other young female Sanders supporters, voting for a woman doesn’t feel pressing — especially at a time of social, economic and now public health crisis.“Seeing yourself in political leaders only goes so far,” Ms. Geye said. To ensure her mom’s support for Mr. Sanders, she reached deep into her political arsenal: “I told her the only way I could afford grandchildren was the world Bernie was working toward. So I may have leveraged grandchildren, but it worked.”That desperate times call for desperate measures is a view almost axiomatic to some Sanders supporters. And some feel that in upending work, school and economic routines, the coronavirus outbreak could make voters more sympathetic to Mr. Sanders’s message of remaking government and a larger social safety net. Mr. Sanders made the point himself during Sunday night’s debate, telling viewers that the pandemic exposes “dysfunctionality” in the country’s health care system.Kirsten Gronlund, 24, who is in self-isolation in her East Village, New York City, apartment, said amid her fears about the coronavirus, she’s also held on to hope that it could be a catalyst for “sweeping, fundamental changes to American life.” The anxieties of quarantine make it challenging for her to focus on day-to-day work, she said, but more meaningful to talk to voters about a brighter vision for the country’s future.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“It’s hard to focus on work when everything feels so apocalyptic,” she said. “It feels like we’re so helpless watching world leaders scramble and flail. But something like organizing for real political change feels like an appropriate response.”The coronavirus quarantines could even offer Sanders phone-bankers a logistical boost. Shivam Shukla, 20, a student at University of South Florida, said he thinks people might be more willing to answer his calls for Sanders and engage rather than hanging up immediately, since many are home and lacking social interaction.Mr. Shukla realizes that the weeks ahead will be rocky for the Sanders campaign, but he’s known since the start that the campaign would be an uphill battle. “It was always going to be a tough ride, but if anytime now is the time to pitch health care for all,” he said. So he’s stocked up on M&M packets and decked out his parents’ Tampa home with cutouts of Mr. Sanders. “My bedroom looks kind of like a campaign office,” he said.Some young Sanders supporters say they’re already seeing the effects of their quarantine campaigns. Katelin Penner, 19, a sophomore at Wesleyan, moved back in with her parents in Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, for the remainder of the semester. Since returning home she has been phone-banking for Mr. Sanders from her bedroom, but she’s living in a house divided; her parents and sister support Mr. Biden. For months, she’s argued with them over policy and electability to no avail — until last weekend.Watching the news on coronavirus in her living room, Ms. Penner’s mother turned to her and said she was beginning to see the appeal of Medicare for all.