At Least 2 Dead as Severe Weather Sweeps Through the South
By Christine HauserAt least two people died after severe weather brought hail and storms through Alabama, Mississippi and other Southern states on Sunday and Monday, the second consecutive weekend that dangerous storms swept through the region.In Alabama, where there was significant damage from wind and hail, the authorities said there was one fatality attributed to the storm. Jerry Oliver Williams Jr., 61, died from trauma as the storm barreled into his mobile home in southeastern Henry County, said Derek Wright, the county coroner.“The mobile home was blown away,” Mr. Wright said in a telephone interview on Monday morning. “It rolled two or three times. It was destroyed.”A few counties north, Shaina Scott and her family heard marble-size hailstones bombard their house on Sunday in Alexander City, in Tallapoosa County. “It sounded like my house was just about to come apart,” she said on Monday. “I couldn’t hear my husband even talking, and we were right next to one another.”In Mississippi, there was one storm-related fatality in Marion County, where a tornado landed on Sunday night, officials said.Jessie Graham, the county coroner, said Jerry Johnson, 70, died in his mobile home in Sandy Hook on Sunday from trauma to the head. “The tornado came through about 7:20 last night,” Mr. Graham said. “I made it in there this morning.”Thousands of customers lost power in the southern part of Alabama, the state authorities said on Monday. Gregory Robinson, an official with the state Emergency Management Agency, said the authorities had reports of 67,000 outages, with damage to buildings and including downed trees and power lines. “We have had up to 19 counties reporting damage, and maybe more,” he said, referring to the south and south-central parts of the state.In Mississippi, officials said Monday that more than 8,000 customers were without power across five counties.Mr. Robinson said the region had been under tornado warnings, but that the state was waiting for confirmation by the National Weather Service about the numbers.Alabama’s peak tornado season runs from March through May, according to the University of Alabama. In March 2019, at least 23 people were killed in Lee County when a cluster of storms ripped through the southeast, spawning multiple tornadoes and leaving a trail of rubble.And just as they did last year, this weekend’s storms pushed east.By midday Monday, a tornado watch was in effect for northeast Florida, stretching up to coastal southeastern Georgia and southeastern South Carolina, the Weather Service’s Storm Prediction Center said. It warned that the system could bring severe thunderstorms and the threat of damaging winds and tornadoes as it moved toward the Atlantic Coast.Wind gusts could reach up to 70 miles per hour, and storms could bring onslaughts of hail the size of Ping-Pong balls, the Weather Service had predicted.The severe weather that passed through Georgia dealt damage, struck out the power and downed trees in at least three counties: Pulaski, Worth and Clinch.One person died in a house fire in Wilcox County, said Lisa Rodriguez-Presley, a spokeswoman for Georgia’s Emergency Management Agency. She said the investigators were trying to determine whether the fire had been caused by lightning.By early afternoon, the system of high winds, lightning and heavy rains had pushed out of the state. “For this storm we really dodged a bullet,” she said. “It did not materialize the way we expected.”In at least nine counties in north and central Florida, a severe thunderstorm watch was in place until 3 p.m. local time, including the Tampa Bay area, the Weather Service said.The service said it confirmed a tornado had touched down near the Boombah Sports Complex in Sanford, Fla. It also had a report of another tornado at Lake Jesup, also in Seminole County. There were no immediate details of fatalities, injuries or damages.Some parts of the South were still trying to recover from a devastating weather system that started on April 12 and barreled across parts of Kentucky, Georgia, Florida, Mississippi, Louisiana and Arkansas. More than 30 people died, making it one of the most significant natural disasters in the country since government officials began ordering people to stay home to slow the spread of the coronavirus.