Want to Know Who Won Super Tuesday? Get Ready to Wait.
By Reid J. Epstein and Maggie AstorAs Super Tuesday votes were being counted on Wednesday morning, the biggest question was how many delegates each candidate would win.We probably won’t know the exact answer for some time.Let’s walk through Tuesday night. The first polls closed at 7 p.m. Eastern time in Vermont and Virginia, and we started getting results — former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. took Virginia and North Carolina, and Senator Bernie Sanders won his home state of Vermont.Later, Mr. Sanders won Colorado while Mr. Biden won more Southern states — Alabama, Arkansas, Tennessee — and the former vice president also won upsets in Minnesota and Massachusetts.But the allocation of delegates takes more time. And we won’t know how Super Tuesday went until we get results from California, which has 415 delegates to distribute — more than 30 percent of what was at stake Tuesday. The polls closed there at 11 p.m. Eastern time, and it will take a long time to count all the votes. (The A.P. has called California for Mr. Sanders.)After the 2018 election, it took nearly a month for the winner to be determined in the Central Valley congressional race between T.J. Cox, the Democrat, and David Valadao, the incumbent Republican. Mr. Valadao eventually conceded.This time, California — like the other 13 states, American Samoa and Democrats Abroad that voted on Tuesday — will have to figure out which candidates won enough votes to cross the 15 percent threshold to accrue delegates. And California will have to do those calculations both statewide and in each of its 53 congressional districts.Of California’s 415 delegates, 144 will be allocated according to the statewide results — so whichever candidates win at least 15 percent of the vote will get a share of those delegates. The remaining 271 delegates will be divided among the congressional districts.The more Democratic a congressional district is, the more delegates it has. California’s 12th and 13th districts — in San Francisco and Oakland — have seven delegates each, while the rest of the districts have four, five or six.See how many delegates are available in each state.Heading into Super Tuesday, Mr. Sanders led with 60 delegates to Mr. Biden’s 53.There were 1,357 delegates at stake in Tuesday’s vote. Mr. Sanders was widely expected to perform well on Super Tuesday, and even to build a delegate lead, but Mr. Biden captured big states like Texas, North Carolina and Virginia and was out ahead of him in delegates. The California delegate allocation could take days or even weeks to finalize.Because of Mr. Sanders’s strength in California — he has the largest team, has raised the most money and is the most popular among Latino voters — he was on track to win the most delegates in the state on Super Tuesday. The issue is how big a lead he will have over his closest competitor there — and how many rivals will reach the 15 percent threshold.Given the tight delegate race at this point, Mr. Biden has a real shot at holding a lead over Mr. Sanders, given the makeup of the states to come. That could mean a long, bitter two-way battle.Ms. Warren and Mr. Bloomberg did not make the 15 percent threshold in many places, but the vote counting is still underway in California.Updated May 25, 2020