Senate Republicans to Push Ahead on Judges Over Democratic Objections
By Carl HulseWASHINGTON — Senate Republicans plan to push ahead next week with a confirmation hearing for a contested nominee to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, moving on a rapid timetable that signals they intend to remain aggressive this year in putting conservative judges on the bench, even amid a pandemic.A top Republican aide and others knowledgeable about the plans said the Judiciary Committee planned to hold a hearing as soon as next Wednesday to consider the nomination of Justin Walker, a U.S. District Court judge in Kentucky who is a protégé of Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader.The quick action reflects a new urgency on the part of Mr. McConnell to fulfill his pledge to “leave no vacancy behind” when it comes to installing judicial nominees. The coronavirus outbreak has cost valuable time he had planned to spend on the effort, forcing the Senate into an extended recess.It has also contributed to a grim political environment for Republicans, which could lift Democrats in the push to take over the Senate next year. A change in Senate control would bring an abrupt end to Mr. McConnell’s successful drive — in cooperation with President Trump — to place scores of conservatives on the federal bench.The majority leader’s office confirmed on Tuesday that the Senate would return to Washington on Monday as planned even though House leaders abruptly scrapped their scheduled return on the advice of congressional officials, including Congress’s attending physician.On a conference call with Republican senators on Tuesday, Mr. McConnell informed his colleagues that the Judiciary Committee would continue to move forward on judges upon their return, according to people knowledgeable about the call who did not want to be identified disclosing internal deliberations. At least one Republican said the party should be looking beyond judges given the pandemic.“As much as judges are important, what people want us to be focused on is Covid,” said Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, the people said.The prospect of a confirmation hearing also drew a rebuke from Democratic members of the Judiciary Committee, who wrote to Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina and the chairman, to urge him to cancel it so the panel could focus on immediate pandemic issues.“There is no urgency to moving lifetime appointments at this juncture,” the letter said. “There is, however, considerable urgency — and growing public demand — for oversight of the federal government’s response to Covid-19,” the Democrats wrote.“Now is not the time to process routine judicial nominations,” they added.Mr. McConnell has been unapologetic about what his top priority is.“As soon as we get back in session, we’ll start confirming judges again,” Mr. McConnell told the conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt last week. “We need to have hearings, and we need to confirm judges.”Republicans have their eyes on confirming more than judges. The Senate Intelligence Committee could also convene a confirmation hearing next week for Representative John Ratcliffe, Republican of Texas, Mr. Trump’s nominee to be the director of national intelligence. Senators in both parties are eager to put in place a permanent spy chief, particularly at a time when intelligence gathering will play a large role in understanding the effects of the pandemic on American interests around the globe.And Mr. Trump has agitated for the Senate to get back to work confirming his nominees, threatening this month that if it did not, he would use a never-before-invoked power to force Congress to adjourn so that he could fill government vacancies himself. (Mr. McConnell promptly issued a statement making it clear that would not happen, and saying that he had promised Mr. Trump he would work to confirm nominees who were “mission-critical to the Covid-19 pandemic.”)Mr. Trump nominated Judge Walker, 37, to the prestigious appeals court on April 3, less than six months after he began serving on the district court bench. He was confirmed to that post last October despite being rated as unqualified by the American Bar Association because of his lack of experience. Mr. McConnell has known Judge Walker since he was in high school, considers him a brilliant legal mind and took him to the Oval Office this year to meet with the president.A former clerk to Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh, Judge Walker was one of his most ardent defenders during the brutal Supreme Court confirmation battle in 2018. Mr. McConnell and Justice Kavanaugh traveled to Louisville in March for Judge Walker’s formal investiture as a district court judge before his latest nomination.Progressive and civil rights groups opposed Judge Walker’s nomination initially and plan to do so again. In a letter sent to senators on Monday, the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights urged a vote against his confirmation, calling his nomination “a triumph of nepotism over neutrality” given his close relationship with Mr. McConnell. The group faulted Judge Walker for his stated opposition to the Affordable Care Act and what it described as ideologically charged comments in defense of Justice Kavanaugh, among other concerns.“At this perilous time in our nation’s history, the Senate should maintain a laser focus on efforts to save lives and mitigate the devastating economic impact of Covid-19 on the American people,” the letter said. “The Senate should not process judicial nominations — particularly those like Mr. Walker who seek to dismantle health care protections for vulnerable people — until the shock of the pandemic has been diminished.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Despite the opposition, Democrats cannot block Judge Walker’s nomination without some Republican defections under Senate rules that allow nominees to win approval on a simple majority vote. Judge Walker had unanimous Republican support last year, and it seems unlikely that any of Mr. McConnell’s colleagues would want to cross him on a nomination in which he has such a strong personal interest without a very good reason. Judge Walker is highly regarded in the conservative judicial advocacy community.The District of Columbia appeals court is considered a steppingstone to the Supreme Court, and its importance was on display on Tuesday when the court heard arguments by conference call in two cases with major significance for the balance of power between Congress and the White House.Since Mr. Trump’s election, he and Mr. McConnell have engaged in a concerted effort to reshape the federal courts and have installed more than 50 judges on the appeals courts and more than 130 on the lower district courts.With the available vacancies shrinking, Mr. McConnell and other Senate Republicans have reached out to sitting federal judges eligible for retirement to encourage them to think about stepping aside now if they want to be sure their successors are named by a Republican president.If the Senate proceeds with confirmation hearings, it will take some creativity and may require limits on the number of lawmakers in the room at any one time to allow appropriate social distancing between them and the nominees being questioned as well as other spectators who are allowed in.