Trump and Cuomo Put Aside Disputes During White House Meeting
By Peter Baker and Jesse McKinleyWASHINGTON — President Trump and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, two New Yorkers who have alternately praised and quarreled with each other during the coronavirus pandemic that has ravaged their mutual home state, met in person on Tuesday to try to resolve differences over testing and financial relief.After weeks of talking by telephone and through the news media, Mr. Cuomo traveled to Washington to sit down with the president at the White House and press for more federal assistance to expand testing for the virus and to help financially devastated state and local governments.Mr. Cuomo afterward called it “a very good conversation,” playing down the sporadic disputes between the two men.“The president is communicative about his feelings, and I’m communicative about what I think,” Mr. Cuomo said on MSNBC. “But look, I think for the president and for myself, this is not about — this is not about anyone’s emotions, about anyone else. I mean, who cares, right? What I feel, what he feels. We have a tremendous job that we have to get done and put everything else aside and do the job. And that was the tone of the conversation, was very functional and effective.”Speaking at an evening news conference in the State Capitol in Albany, Mr. Cuomo said the meeting largely focused on ramping up diagnostic testing in New York. “Testing is a very complicated issue with a lot of levels,” he said, adding that he discussed division of labor between federal government and state. “That’s what we did this afternoon.”In particular, Mr. Cuomo said that the state needed help in unknotting a supply chain from large manufacturers to some 300 smaller laboratories in New York. The state, he said, “can’t do international supply chains,” and he added that he wanted to “let the federal government take responsibility for that federal supply chain.”Mr. Cuomo said that he secured a commitment from the president to try to increase the number of tests in New York for both the coronavirus and the antibodies to 40,000 a day. The federal government will work on increasing the supply of reagents and testing kits from national manufacturers necessary to process the tests, and the state will handle coordination with the laboratories in New York.Mr. Trump did not invite cameras to record the encounter, as he typically does with prominent visitors. But at his daily briefing later in the afternoon, the president said he and the governor were aligned on the issue of testing without elaborating.“We had a great talk on testing,” Mr. Trump said. “We have an agreement, we have an understanding on testing.” He also signaled a willingness to seek aid for states. “I agree with him on that,” he said, “and I think most Republicans agree too, and Democrats.”The president added that he had worked hard to help New York by helping provide medical equipment and new hospital beds and sending the Navy hospital ship Comfort, which is no longer needed and so will return to its home port in Virginia. “The federal government has spared no expense or resource to get New Yorkers the care they need and the care they deserve,” Mr. Trump said.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The president and governor of different political parties have variously exchanged compliments and argued long distance over the past six weeks as New York became the epicenter of the pandemic in the United States with more than 250,000 reported cases and about 15,000 deaths.They have been at odds over the provision of equipment like ventilators and over the president’s claim to “absolute” power to overrule governors to reopen businesses, schools and everyday life. “We don’t have a king in this country,” Mr. Cuomo said at one point. But at others, he has said Mr. Trump has “delivered for New York.”After Tuesday’s meeting, Mr. Cuomo said he did not bother to raise some of their past disputes during their time together in the White House. “You can’t rebut everything,” he said, “so sometimes you just let it go in life.”