White House Rattled by a Military Aide’s Positive Coronavirus Test
By Michael Crowley and Michael D. ShearWASHINGTON — President Trump said on Thursday that the White House staff would be tested every day for the coronavirus after a military aide who has had contact with him was found to have the virus.Asked by reporters about the aide, whom a senior administration official described as a personal valet to the president, Mr. Trump downplayed the matter. “I’ve had very little contact, personal contact, with this gentleman,” he said. But he added that he and other officials and staff members at the White House would be tested more frequently.A White House spokesman said that Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence had both tested negative for the virus since their exposure to the military aide and were “in great health.” But the episode raised new questions about how well-protected Mr. Trump and other top officials are as they work at the White House, typically without wearing masks.The military aide’s illness was first reported by CNN on the day before eight World War II veterans — each older than 95, an age group at high statistical risk for serious illness from the virus — are scheduled to take part in a photo-op at the White House and an event at the World War II Memorial nearby to celebrate the 75th anniversary on Friday of the German surrender, known as V-E Day.Judd Deere, the deputy White House press secretary, said in a statement that Mr. Trump’s physician and the White House’s operations team takes “every precaution” to protect the president, his family and the White House complex.“In addition to social distancing, daily temperature checks and symptom histories, hand sanitizer, and regular deep cleaning of all work spaces, every staff member in close proximity to the president and vice president is being tested daily for Covid-19 as well as any guests,” Mr. Deere said.Mr. Trump has said that the White House uses a test kit made by Abbott, which can return results on the spot in as little as five minutes. But health professionals have warned that the Abbott test kit produces less reliable results than those shipped to labs but which can take days. And even as he announced the increased frequency of the tests, the president appeared to cast doubt on their value.”It just shows you the fallacy — what I’ve been saying, testing is not a perfect art,” he said. “No matter what you do, testing is not a perfect art.”It was unclear what he meant. If anything, the White House’s shift to more frequent testing validates the view of public health experts that exponentially more testing is needed nationwide to contain the virus’s spread.Before departing for a trip to Arizona on Tuesday, Mr. Trump said he was unconcerned about the health risks of traveling because the people joining him, including members of his Secret Service detail, had been tested in the past hour. “We have great testing,” he said.The president has not been seen wearing a mask, and few top White House officials do so. Asked about the practice, which public health experts strongly recommend, Mr. Trump insisted that “a lot of people in the White House wear masks,” adding, “I see it all the time.”As part of the celebration, the veterans will have their pictures taken at the White House with the secretaries of defense and state as well as the first lady, Melania Trump, and the president, according to a schedule prepared by the Greatest Generations Foundation, which organized the event.The schedule says the men, who range in age from 96 to 100, will be tested before they enter the White House grounds. The group is then expected to ride in the president’s motorcade to the memorial for the ceremony. At least one family member worries that the event will endanger the men at a time when the virus is still spreading in Washington.“I think it’s very irresponsible to have the last remaining World War II veterans travel across the country to take a photograph during a global pandemic,” said Alex Melikian, the granddaughter of Sgt. Gregory Melikian, 97, one of the men who will be meeting the president.“People over the age of 80 have the highest chance of passing away from this. If he gets it, this could be the end,” she said of her grandfather, who was a radio operator who worked for General Dwight D. Eisenhower during the war. “I know it’s his choice to go, but it’s irresponsible to even have an event like this in the first place.”transcriptWe all believe in tests. We have the best tests in the world. But they were tested. I believe they’re tested on a weekly basis. I just had a test as you probably heard. In fact I had one yesterday, and I had one today. And it’s negative. Mike just had a test and it’s negative, but they do the tests and it just shows you that the fallacy — it’s what I’ve been saying — testing is not a perfect art no matter what you do. Testing is not a perfect art. So we test once a week. Now we’re going to go testing once a day. But even when you test once a day somebody could — something happens where they catch something. I’ve had very little contact, personal contact, with this gentleman. Know who he is — good person. But I’ve had very little contact. Mike has had very little contact with him. But Mike was tested, and I was tested — we were both tested.Administration officials said the foundation had contacted the White House several weeks ago about participating in any celebration Mr. Trump held to mark the victory over German forces in Europe. The foundation chose the veterans who are taking part in the event, officials said, adding that the White House was taking precautions to keep the veterans, the president and others safe.“Leave it to the media to question eight brave war heroes for joining the president of the United States at the nation’s World War II Memorial on the 75th anniversary of V-E Day,” Mr. Deere said.“As young men, these heroes stared evil in the eyes,” he said. “No pandemic will stop them from joining their commander in chief for this momentous occasion.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Timothy Davis, the president of the foundation, said he reached out to the White House after the group’s original trip to mark the anniversary, to Moscow, was canceled because of the pandemic. He said he was happy when he received the president’s invitation.“We know we are going to be losing them quickly over the coming years,” he said of the remaining World War II veterans.Mr. Davis said he respected the concerns of people like Ms. Melikian. But he said the veterans understood and accepted the risk. “This is their wish. They know they don’t have much time left. Their voices, their stories need to be told,” he said. “They were adamant they wanted to do this.”Ms. Melikian said she was still concerned that her grandfather might not survive if he fell ill, and that he could carry the virus home to Arizona. “When he comes back, he could pass it along to my grandma,” she said. “He shouldn’t be leaving his house. ”