Any American Can Now Be Tested for the Coronavirus, Pence Says
By Noah Weiland, Katie Rogers and Emily CochraneWASHINGTON — Vice President Mike Pence said the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had lifted all restrictions on testing for the coronavirus and would be releasing new guidelines to fast-track testing for people who fear they have the virus, even if they are displaying mild symptoms.“Today we will issue new guidance from the C.D.C. that will make it clear that any American can be tested, no restrictions, subject to doctor’s orders,” Mr. Pence told reporters at the White House. “Any American can be tested. We’re removing that barrier.”The Trump administration has struggled to project confidence and progress in the fight against the coronavirus and simultaneously prepare Americans for what could be a difficult struggle. The slow start in testing for the virus has been particularly vexing.Officials at the White House emphasized that the supply of tests may not fully meet demand until the coming weeks. But they said that around 2,500 test kits for more than one million individual tests could be available by the end of the week, and that an additional million tests could be manufactured weekly after that.“We are trying to meet that demand with increased capacity,” Dr. Stephen Hahn, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, told reporters during the briefing. “Right now, I’d say we’d need more capacity.”On Saturday, the F.D.A. gave laboratories and hospitals around the country the go-ahead to conduct tests that had been limited to those analyzed by the C.D.C., which had been enforcing strict guidelines about who was allowed to be tested. Mr. Pence’s announcement on Tuesday loosened those regulations further.Dr. Hahn said at a Senate hearing that the C.D.C. was working with a private manufacturer to drastically increase the testing capacity of laboratories across the nation.“Our expectation in talking to the company that is scaling this up is that we should have the capacity by the end of the week to have kits available to the laboratories to perform about a million tests,” he said.When Dr. Hahn was asked to clarify, he said he was hearing from private manufacturers that 2,500 test kits could be available by the end of the week, with each kit capable of 500 tests. Later in the day, Mr. Pence repeated that number to reporters, saying the kits amounted to 1.5 million tests.“This is a dynamic process,” Dr. Hahn said. “Every day we’re hearing from additional manufacturers.”But under questioning from senators in both parties, Mr. Pence, who is leading the administration’s coronavirus response, and other top health officials were unable to satisfy lawmakers’ concerns.“They could not answer how soon people would be able to get the tests,” said Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, emerging from a lunchtime briefing with Mr. Pence and top health officials. “We need an on-site test, not a test that has to be sent far away and sent back, and we need to know where people can get it, how people can get it.”Senator Bill Cassidy, Republican of Louisiana and a medical doctor, agreed that “there was concern about the testing — a lot of concern about testing.”“The point was made in there that everybody who gets sick is above age 50 almost,” Mr. Cassidy continued, “and nobody has been dying less than age 20, but that doesn’t mean they’re not infected.”Democrats also raised concerns with the officials about making sure the test is “not so costly that people don’t get it,” Mr. Schumer said. “And there were no answers to those vital questions.”The issue of vaccine affordability is a final sticking point in negotiations on an emergency aid package to respond to the virus, which lawmakers and staff members said they hoped to unveil late Tuesday. Mr. Schumer said the package, which is expected to be at least $7 billion, would include funding to state and local agencies responding to the virus, as well as funding for equipment and the development of a vaccine.The package, which has been quickly cobbled together over the past few days, is expected to be far larger than the White House’s initial proposal: $1.25 billion in new funds, paired with a transfer of existing funds from other health programs.House Democrats have said they hope to hold a vote on the emergency bill by the end of the week. Democrats want to ensure that drugmakers charge the government reasonable prices for treatments and vaccines once they become available.“We believe that the vaccine should be very cost-effective, and not be out of the reach of average folks,” Mr. Schumer said. “That’s one of the arguments that’s still being disputed.”New infections in Westchester County, N.Y.; San Mateo County, Calif.; Wake County, N.C., and Fulton County, Ga., since Monday evening made clear that the coronavirus was spreading in the sprawl of America’s largest urban centers and was no longer tethered to international travelers. In the United States, there have been at least 120 cases of coronavirus confirmed by lab tests as of Tuesday evening, and worldwide infections neared 93,000.On Tuesday, the Department of Veterans Affairs confirmed that a veteran had tested positive for the virus for the first time, and was transferred to the V.A. hospital in Palo Alto, Calif. The case presented the federal government with a new challenge, a coronavirus infection in its sprawling veterans health care system.The number of tests that will actually be administered in the coming days could be substantially lower than the administration’s projection of one million by next week. A spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services said on Monday that public health labs can currently test 15,000 people, and could test up to 75,000 by the end of this week.The Association of Public Health Laboratories, which represents state and local government laboratories around the country, has said that its labs would be able to conduct about 10,000 tests a day when all of its 100 members that can perform testing are running. Scott Becker, the executive director of the lab association, said on Monday that labs can run about 100 tests per day. As of Monday, he said fewer than half of those labs were able to do so.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“All that matters is how many people you can test a day,” said Scott Gottlieb, who was the F.D.A. commissioner from 2017 to 2019.As they learned on Tuesday that the death toll in their state had reached nine, the two Democratic senators from Washington pressed Mr. Pence and the health officials about both the administration’s response and its message to the public, particularly about the availability of testing.“Our message to them was, be clear that they aren’t readily available, and the universe of people who have access to them is not large enough,” Senator Maria Cantwell said. “Let’s figure out a more aggressive plan.”The state’s other senator, Patty Murray, said she had been hearing from constituents who were desperately calling “every number they can find” for information, and cannot get through.“I think there’s a lot of concern about honest, accurate reflection of what is real when you have something like this happening,” Ms. Murray said.She criticized the Trump administration’s efforts to play down the effects of the virus.“What I really feel strongly about is, we do not need Mick Mulvaney telling people don’t watch TV,” she added, referring to remarks made by the acting White House chief of staff. “We do not need the president saying this is fear mongering.”Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told Politico in an interview on Friday that Americans should expect the outbreak to worsen.“I don’t think that we are going to get out of this completely unscathed,” he said. “I think that this is going to be one of those things we look back on and say, ‘Boy, that was bad.’”Dr. Fauci also said that he would be truthful in his public pronouncements, even as President Trump sought to minimize the virus’s impact.“You should never destroy your own credibility. And you don’t want to go to war with a president,” Dr. Fauci told Politico. “But you got to walk the fine balance of making sure you continue to tell the truth.”