Pence, a Loyalist Tapped for Coronavirus Effort, Adds to Trump’s Mixed Messages
By Katie RogersWASHINGTON — Vice President Mike Pence has long been a one-man political cleanup crew for President Trump. From his day trip last fall to Turkey to negotiate a cease-fire in northern Syria to his takeover of the chaotic presidential transition, Mr. Pence is used to being diverted from his reliably anodyne schedule.Now he has moved into one of the biggest political janitor jobs of all time.Mr. Trump, who in recent weeks was infuriated by early decisions to allow coronavirus patients into the United States and irritated by public health officials offering their assessments to the public, has turned to Mr. Pence, an unfailing loyalist, to tamp down on messaging efforts and wrangle competing offices within the White House.“Having the vice president gives me the biggest stick one could have in the government on this whole-of-government approach,” Mr. Trump proclaimed last week when he appointed Mr. Pence to lead the administration’s coronavirus task force.He did not mention that one of Mr. Pence’s jobs is to clean up after a font of misinformation, the president himself, who has said he has a “hunch” that the virus is not as lethal as experts say and that everything will be better by April.Mr. Pence, who maintains the emotive exterior of a block of marble, is a new daily fixture in the White House briefing room, where he offers 5 p.m. updates on the crisis and is disciplined with his words — his nickname on the 2016 Trump campaign was “On Message Mike.” But Mr. Pence has already had to clean up some messes of his own.Early in the week Mr. Pence declared that “any American could be tested” for the virus, but by Thursday had to tell reporters that “we don’t have enough tests today to meet what we anticipate will be the demand going forward.”On Wednesday, Mr. Pence said several times that the Department of Health and Human Services had ensured that insurance companies, as well as Medicare and Medicaid, would all provide coverage for coronavirus tests, by designating the lab test an “Essential Health Benefit.” But his assertion substantially misrepresented the reach of that legal authority, which was established under the Affordable Care Act, and ignored the fact that Republicans in Congress had specifically targeted that provision for removal in 2017.His performance led critics to say that the coronavirus is not a political or public relations battle but a public health crisis that is immune to spin.“If you want to build public trust in an emergency, people have to believe you’re telling the truth,” said Gregg Gonsalves, an epidemiologist at the Yale School of Public Health. “You get this sad feeling like they’re doing political damage control rather than thinking about how to handle this.”Still, the vice president has been credited with a demeanor more dignified than the ramblings and political attacks that often come from Mr. Trump when he talks publicly about the virus. (On Friday during a trip to the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, Mr. Trump called Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington a “snake.”) White House aides say Mr. Pence has instilled a measure of order in task force meetings, at least one of which he opened with a prayer. He has also been traveling.On Thursday, Mr. Pence flew to Minnesota to meet with medical equipment manufacturers before flying to Washington State, which has reported 84 cases and 14 deaths, where he bumped elbows with the governor. The president, speaking at a Fox News forum in Pennsylvania on Thursday night, praised Mr. Pence for working “20 hours a day or more.”The president also tried to tamp down pervasive speculation in Washington that he will remove Mr. Pence from the 2020 ticket should he mishandle the virus effort.“I get along great with the vice president and I keep hearing that I’m replacing him but he’s doing a phenomenal job,” Mr. Trump said at the forum. “He’s a great guy and a loyal guy and he works so hard.”As Marc Short, Mr. Pence’s chief of staff, put it: “He is uniquely qualified for this because of his close relationship to the president. Basically there’s no confusion that the president’s in charge.’’Mr. Pence, the former governor of Indiana, has no public health expertise, and is remembered in his home state for slow-walking a decision to approve the distribution of clean needles for intravenous drug users, which he initially opposed on moral grounds. His decision is cited as a main reason that an H.I.V. crisis in a rural community ballooned to epidemic proportions.“When it comes to a public health emergency, I would question whether or not he has the capacity to really listen to the experts in making informed decisions rather than grappling with his own personal beliefs,” said Dr. Carrie Lawrence, an assistant research scientist at the Indiana University School of Public Health-Bloomington.Mr. Pence’s allies say that his appearances in the White House briefing room show that he is listening to public health experts, and point to how he steps back and relies on their knowledge when he doesn’t know the answer. “Get used to this,” he told reporters at a briefing on Tuesday, as he gestured for Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, to take the podium.Updated May 20, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mr. Pence’s official advice echoes a Twitter bulletin issued by President Barack Obama, the gist of which is: Wash hands, leave masks for health care workers and listen to experts.Mr. Pence has also been to Capitol Hill with his team to brief lawmakers, who praise the time he has spent with them but not always the information provided.“They answered a lot of questions,” Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the minority leader, said. “The problem is they didn’t have as many answers as we needed.”Some state officials say they are appreciative of Mr. Pence’s efforts. Gov. Kate Brown of Oregon, a Democrat, said that she had been surprised by the amount of attention Mr. Pence had given her state, which has reported three coronavirus cases, and the administration’s decision to convene governors from across the country to discuss their needs.“I would put them as extremely responsive right now,” she said. “Obviously I’m aware of his history around science but you know, he’s a former governor. He knows what it’s like to be on the front lines.”