Cap and Gone? College Commencements Confront the Coronavirus
By Christopher MeleThe University of Michigan on Friday canceled its commencement planned for May over fears of the coronavirus — one of what is likely to be many such college ceremonies to be reconsidered in the face of the pandemic.The ceremony, which was to be held May 2 at Michigan Stadium and feature former Vice President Al Gore as the speaker, was scuttled to minimize the potential spread of the disease, the college announced.More than 9,000 students would have been eligible to participate in the event, which customarily draws tens of thousands, a university spokesman said.Public health officials have warned that such large gatherings facilitate the spread of the virus because of the proximity of attendees. The university, which is in Ann Arbor, about 45 miles west of Detroit, said its announcement applied to “large campuswide ceremonies and individual school, college and group recognition ceremonies.”“We know that this is very disappointing to many, and we are looking at ways to celebrate 2020 graduates in the future,” it added.Lilly Hanson, 22, a senior at the university studying business, said she was not surprised to learn of the cancellation but that the news was still a disappointment.“I knew this would blow up and be a full-scale thing,” she said on Friday night, referring to the coronavirus outbreak.The school announced this week that it was canceling classes on Thursday and Friday, and on Friday announced it was shifting to strictly remote instruction for the rest of the semester.Ms. Hanson, of Denver, said it was “bittersweet” to not be able to spend more time in person with classmates but that she was more disappointed to miss as important a milestone as graduation.At the University of Maine in Orono, just north of Bangor, decisions are still being weighed about its commencement ceremony.But after the school announced on Wednesday that it would shift to remote instruction starting March 23, students mobilized and organized an impromptu “Coronamencement,” which they celebrated on Friday.Hailey Bryant, 21, a senior majoring in journalism and political science, said students wanted to do something to ensure their graduation was not lost.“It was really hard because we’ve all been envisioning our graduation since we started college and all of a sudden it was taken away,” she said Friday night.Ms. Bryant, of Gorham, Maine, a reporter for The Bangor Daily News, wrote that the event took root after another senior, Sophia Palangas, started a Facebook event to get together with friends for a final farewell.“The idea caught on fast, and by this morning, more than 400 people had marked that they would attend,” she wrote. Some dressed in cardboard caps and bathrobes and others in dresses and suits, she wrote.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Robert Q. Dana, the university’s vice president for student affairs and dean of students, attended the event, which “made it feel a bit more official, like the school cared about our feelings,” Ms. Bryant said.Mr. Dana said the school was considering alternate venues, such as an outdoor football stadium instead of an indoor hockey arena, to host the commencement.He said the university would be “very student-centric in our decision making” given the importance of the ceremony.He said that the “Coronamencement” showed that the students could find light despite the darkness of the grim pervasive news.