Judge Orders Michael Avenatti to Be Held Without Bail
By Mihir ZaveriMichael Avenatti, who was arrested in California on accusations that he violated the terms of his bail, is to remain in federal custody and be transported to New York to stand trial in a separate case, a judge ordered Wednesday. Mr. Avenatti was arrested Tuesday after prosecutors said that he defrauded and concealed money from creditors while on bail for similar charges from last year. In that case, Mr. Avenatti is accused of stealing millions of dollars from clients and of lying about his business and income to an I.R.S. collection agent, creditors and a bankruptcy court, among others. In March, he was arrested and released.But prosecutors in California said in court filings made public Wednesday that Mr. Avenatti had violated the conditions of his bail by continuing to engage in criminal activity. They asked that Mr. Avenatti be kept in federal custody ahead of a trial that was slated to begin in May, a request that Judge James V. Selna granted.In the New York case, Mr. Avenatti was charged with trying to extort millions of dollars from Nike. The trial in the Nike case was set to begin next week, but in a conference call on Wednesday afternoon, Judge Paul G. Gardephe postponed it to give the defense counsel enough opportunity to speak with Mr. Avenatti. Mr. Avenatti is expected to be transported to New York before next Tuesday, and Judge Gardephe said the new trial should begin no later than Jan. 27. “The arrest has created enormous disruption and unless parties coordinate effectively, I really have no idea when this trial is going to be tried,” Judge Gardephe said during a telephone conference. “I am asking people to be practical here given the hand we have been dealt — which is a bad one.” Mr. Avenatti’s defense counsel also expressed frustration with the timing of the arrest. “I’ve never encountered a situation like this,” Jose Quinon, one of Mr. Avenatti’s lawyers, said. “On the eve of trial, we’re left out naked in the street with no way to defend ourselves.”Mr. Avenatti has pleaded not guilty in the Nike case.I.R.S. agents arrested Mr. Avenatti on Tuesday evening in the middle of a California State Bar hearing in Los Angeles on whether he should be allowed to continue practicing law, said Teresa Ruano, a spokeswoman for the bar.In the court filings, prosecutors in California outlined several new accusations involving some of the same victims identified in the case.Prosecutors said in May, for example, that Mr. Avenatti transferred more than $700,000 out of a new bank account to a former wife — some of which was used to buy a Mercedes-Benz vehicle — “to defraud and conceal assets from his creditors, including a number of the victims of the alleged criminal conduct in this case.” Between June and September, Mr. Avenatti bought cashier’s checks to “drain his accounts of any remaining funds” and to limit the ability of creditors to recover debts, but would redeposit them when he needed money, prosecutors said.He also structured certain financial transactions to “evade currency reporting requirements,” prosecutors said.Mr. Avenatti “has also repeatedly demonstrated that he is unlikely to comply with any conditions imposed by this court and has a long history of violating court orders,” prosecutors said. “Because there are no conditions or combinations of conditions that will ensure the safety of the community, defendant’s bond should be revoked and he should be detained pending trial.”Mr. Avenatti has previously pleaded not guilty in the California case.Mr. Avenatti’s arrest was yet another setback for the brash lawyer, who rose to prominence representing Stormy Daniels, the pornographic film star, in a lawsuit against President Trump. Mr. Avenatti has been an outspoken critic of Mr. Trump, and he flirted with a run for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2018.He was arrested in November of that year on suspicion of domestic violence, an accusation he denied. In February 2019, the Los Angeles City Attorney’s Office said it had decided not to file charges against Mr. Avenatti at that time, but reserved the right to do so in the future.In May, he was charged with misappropriating nearly $300,000 belonging to Ms. Daniels. He has pleaded not guilty in that case.If convicted on all of the charges pending against him, Mr. Avenatti could be sentenced to more than 300 years in prison.