Key Moments as Trump’s Impeachment Trial Formally Begins
transcript“It is a sad day for America, and yesterday was one when we were given no choice but to send to the Senate two articles of impeachment against Donald Trump, the president of the United States. We saw a strong case — an infallible, undeniable case — for the impeachment of the president. So no future president would ever think that she or he could get away with what President Trump has been getting away with.” “The hour of 12 noon having arrived, and a quorum being present, the sergeant-at-arms will present the managers on the part of the House of Representatives. The sergeant-at-arms will make the proclamation.” “Hear ye, hear ye, hear ye. All persons are commanded to keep silent on pain of imprisonment, while the House of Representatives is exhibiting to the Senate of the United States articles of impeachment against Donald John Trump, president of the United States.” “The House will now proceed. The escort committee will now conduct the chief justice of the United States to the dais to be administered the oath.” “Senators, I attend the Senate in conformity with your notice for the purpose of joining with you for the trial of the president of the United States.” “Do you solemnly swear that in all things appertaining to the trial of the impeachment of Donald John Trump, president of the United States, now pending, you will do impartial justice, according to the Constitution and the laws, so help you God?” “I do.” “The clerk will call the names in groups of four, and senators will present themselves at the desk to sign the oath book.”By Eileen SullivanWith the six other House Democrats serving as impeachment managers beside him, Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, ceremoniously walked the articles of impeachment from the House chamber to the Senate chamber midday Thursday. It was the second such journey for the group in the past 24 hours, after formally delivering the articles to the Senate on Wednesday evening.With the full Senate seated before him, Mr. Schiff read aloud the charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress against Mr. Trump. The two charges together are just over eight pages long.Drawings of the proceedings from inside the Senate chamber, where no photos are allowed.“President Trump thus warrants impeachment and trial, removal from office and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under the United States,” Mr. Schiff said as he concluded.That Mr. Schiff would assume the spotlight during this historic moment was sure to irk Mr. Trump, who has targeted him for mockery and criticism and accused him of being the one who committed “high crimes and misdemeanors.”The White House press secretary, Stephanie Grisham, hit back on Twitter and accused Democrats of the same crimes covered by the articles.Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. was sworn in Thursday afternoon to preside over the president’s trial where he will perform a largely ceremonial role. (Under Senate rules, the chief justice’s decisions in the trial can be overruled by a majority vote of the senators).Chief Justice Roberts’s exact duties have yet to be defined, but as the deep partisanship between the Democrats and Republicans spills out over a trial that is expected to last weeks, his reputation for being independent is at stake.The oath reads: “I solemnly swear that in all things appertaining to the trial of the impeachment of Donald John Trump, president of the United States, now pending, I will do impartial justice according to the Constitution and laws: So help me God.”After Chief Justice Roberts took his oath, read to him by Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, he turned to the senators in the chamber and asked them to do the same. Then, the senators signed their name in an oath book.Aides said Mr. Trump was not watching the ceremonial events on television as the trial got underway. But after an event in the Oval Office celebrating National Religious Freedom Day, the president told reporters that he hoped the trial would not last long.“I think it should go very quickly,” Mr. Trump said. “It’s a hoax, it’s a hoax. Everybody knows that.”Mr. Trump has vacillated between favoring a short trial or a longer spectacle that could be used as an opportunity to present his side of the story.White House officials and senior senators have predicted the trial will last two to six weeks. The impeachment trial of former President Bill Clinton was five weeks long.An independent federal watchdog, the Government Accountability Office, found that the Trump administration broke the law when it withheld millions of dollars in security assistance to Ukraine. The report, released Thursday, cited a violation of a 1974 law that protects the spending decisions of Congress. The White House budget office rejected the finding.The White House and Trump allies continued to undercut a flood of new details coming from a Soviet-born businessman involved in the president’s efforts to pressure Ukraine to help him politically. The businessman, Lev Parnas, is an associate of the president’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani.Mr. Parnas is under federal indictment but out on bail. In a series of interviews with reporters Wednesday, he alleged that his efforts along with Mr. Giuliani to oust the American ambassador to Ukraine were done with the president’s knowledge and consent. Mr. Parnas said Attorney General William P. Barr was also involved in these efforts.Earlier this week, House Democrats disclosed documents from Mr. Parnas revealing efforts by him and another man to follow the American ambassador to Ukraine at the time, Marie L. Yovanovitch. On Thursday, the Ukrainian police announced an investigation into whether she was under illegal surveillance while she was stationed there.Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, announced a series of deadlines to be met by the impeachment managers and the president’s legal team before the trial begins on Tuesday at 1 p.m. Mr. Trump has until 6 p.m. on Saturday to submit his formal responses to the charges against him.The trial will be held each day of the week, except Sunday, starting at 1 p.m. During the trial, senators will not be allowed to have their cellphones or other electronic devices in the chamber and their movements outside the chamber will be constricted.