Coronavirus Briefing: What Happened Today
By Patrick J. LyonsThis is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.California is expanding testing to include some people who show no symptoms of the virus.Chinese agents helped spread false lockdown messages in the U.S., American officials say.The British Parliament has started holding sessions in cyberspace, breaking with seven centuries of tradition.Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverageA startling discovery has rewritten the timeline of the pandemic in the United States: A woman who died at home in Santa Clara County, Calif., on Feb. 6 was infected with the coronavirus, and probably caught it sometime in January.Since the woman had no known exposure from travel, her contraction of the virus suggested that it must already have been spreading in the San Francisco Bay Area long before the federal government began restricting travel from China.Testing in the U.S. was so limited in February — because of tight restrictions and botched test-kit manufacturing — that officials didn’t identify a case of community transmission until Feb. 26 or a virus-linked death until Feb. 29.Experts said that if officials had known that the virus already had a foothold in the United States, there would have been more urgency in February to expand testing, prepare hospitals and get more protective gear. Instead, the government’s focus was on quarantining travelers from Asia.Dr. Sara Cody, the county’s chief medical officer, said that the woman’s death as well as another individual on Feb. 17 were newly linked to the virus and were “probably the tip of an iceberg of unknown size.”Genes trace the path: Researchers studying the virus’s genome believe that it had begun to circulate in the New York area by mid-February, coming mainly from Europe, and that it spread undetected in the Seattle area for weeks after arriving there from Wuhan, China.Mike Baker and Sheri Fink of The Times report about how the genetically unique version of the virus that landed near Seattle has jumped to 14 other states and now accounts for one-quarter of all U.S. cases whose genetic data has been made public.The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.How many deaths are an acceptable price to pay to restart the economy?That macabre question confronts political leaders everywhere, writes Peter Baker, our chief White House correspondent, because in the continued absence of either a vaccine or a cure for Covid-19, any move to lift stay-at-home orders and to relax restrictions on commerce will involve a trade-off in some number of additional infections and fatalities.The shutdowns that have hobbled the economy and thrown 22 million Americans out of work have also clearly saved many thousands of lives. Some models predicted two million deaths in the U.S. if nothing was done; with social distancing precautions, the figure seems headed for something closer to 60,000.Assessing whether shutting down — or reopening — is worth the cost means doing something many people find heartless: putting a dollar value on a human life. Government analysts do it all of the time.For example, 41,000 deaths from opioid overdoses were valued in 2015 at $431.7 billion, or about $10.5 million per person, according to a recent White House report. Using that figure, if the shutdowns around the country were to save roughly two million lives, they would be worth a total of about $21 trillion — more than 10 times the cost of the recent $2 trillion relief package.Some advocates of rapid reopening have offered a similar cold-eyed calculus, arguing that the immense economic harm being done by the shutdowns far outweigh the value of the additional lives that may be saved by keeping them in place.Of course, it may not be as simple as that. Reopening the economy earlier may not pay dividends in the long run, and may actually do more economic harm, if the virus came roaring back and shredded public confidence.And it’s far from clear how many people would be willing to go to the movies, get haircuts or dine out now, even if they could.“If you opened every restaurant in New Jersey tomorrow, I don’t think anybody would show up,” Gov. Philip D. Murphy told The Times. With much of humanity stuck at home, the 50th anniversary of Earth Day arrived on Wednesday without many in-person celebrations but with a silver lining of sorts: The rewilding of some urban areas on a suddenly quieter, less crowded planet.It has taken many forms. A herd of shaggy goats was spotted running down desolate streets in Wales, and monkeys were seen taking over a plaza in Thailand. Coyotes have ventured deeper into San Francisco, and deer have wandered freely around Nara, Japan.Captive animals have benefited, too. Penguins have been allowed to roam the exhibits at the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago. And pandas at a Hong Kong zoo finally managed to mate after 13 years — perhaps thanks to a little privacy.But the environmental benefits of the crisis are only temporary, the United Nations has warned. And climate change and other ways we disrupt biodiversity, like industrial-scale livestock production, can increase the transmission of “zoonotic” diseases — the ones that move from animals to humans, like Covid-19.Bad news for felines: Two domestic cats in New York State have tested positive for the coronavirus, the first pets found to be infected in the U.S.And India’s 50 wild tiger reserves are on high alert after a tiger with a mysterious respiratory illness died this month. Around the same time, a tiger at the Bronx Zoo became the first confirmed case in a big cat.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Though life has returned to normal in much of China, officials are scrambling to control a coronavirus outbreak centered around the northern city of Harbin.Haiti, with 58 cases and four deaths, is worried about laid-off Haitian workers returning from the Dominican Republic (5,300 cases and 260 deaths) and bringing the virus with them.Eight infants and toddlers at a residential care center in Tokyo have tested positive for the coronavirus, raising concerns about a wider outbreak at facilities for neglected or abused children.The U.N. has confirmed the first known case in a Palestinian refugee camp in Lebanon, intensifying fears that the virus will tear through one of the Middle East’s most vulnerable populations.Manage stress-eating (or not eating). Anxiety and changes in routine may have scrambled your eating habits. Here are some tips to help.Beware of identity theft. Criminals are using people’s Social Security numbers and other personal information to steal their stimulus checks and unemployment benefits.Keep your pets healthy. Watch for changes in behavior that could signal stress, like hissing. Don’t overwalk your dog just because you want to get out.Want to help? We’ve created a hub for ways you can make an impact, support front-line workers and help your community fight the virus.The pandemic could almost double the number of people facing acute hunger this year to 265 million around the world.A German biotechnology company said it was ready to begin clinical vaccine trials. It’s believed to be the fourth trial to get underway internationally.Many politicians who are urging the public to wear face masks are ignoring their own advice.Where did the social distancing strategy come from? It involved a high school science fair, George W. Bush, history lessons and some determined researchers.With New York City crematories struggling with three-week backlogs, a professor of mortuary science has been transporting bodies to spare grieving families the wait.A pair of octogenarian lovers kept apart by the closing of the German-Danish border found a romantic way to stay in touch.In the spirit of recognizing the joy found in small things, our family is making a multicolored paper chain to mark our days at home, and to record daily gratitude. Our paper chain hangs in our kitchen, and is a constant reminder of the steadfast goodness and love that surround us in the midst of these palpably uncertain times.— Natalie Jackson, Lookout Mountain, Tenn.Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.Sign up here to get the briefing by email.Lara Takenaga and Jonathan Wolfe helped write today’s newsletter.