Florida Governor, at Long Last, Orders Residents to Stay Home to Avoid Coronavirus
By Patricia Mazzei and Maggie HabermanMIAMI — Florida’s coronavirus cases kept ballooning, especially in the dense neighborhoods of Miami and Fort Lauderdale. Hospitals in Fort Myers and Naples begged for donations of masks and other protective equipment. Young people started to die.And still, Gov. Ron DeSantis resisted. The man entrusted with keeping many of the country’s grandparents safe did not want to dictate that all Floridians had to stay at home.What it took for Mr. DeSantis to change his mind on Wednesday and finally issue a statewide order were a phone call with President Trump and a grave reckoning. A day earlier, the White House had projected how many American lives might be lost — up to 240,000 — without a national commitment to immediate, drastic action in every state.The number of coronavirus infections in Florida had jumped by more than 1,000 on Tuesday, its largest 24-hour increase, to reach nearly 7,000, giving rise to worries that the infection was already dangerously out of hand.For Mr. DeSantis, a 41-year-old first-term Republican governor considered a contender for higher political office, relenting was an acknowledgment that the Florida economy, so reliant on tourism, would inevitably grind to a halt because of the virus. Without statewide measures, recovery from the pandemic might only take longer.“People aren’t just going to go back to work” by April 15, Mr. DeSantis said at a news conference in Tallahassee, the state capital, calling the stringent social-distancing orders that take effect on Friday “a national pause button.”Thirty-seven states have adopted statewide orders for people to stay at home, including most recently Georgia and Mississippi. The full scale of the virus threat delivered by the White House was a powerful new message to conservative governors who have been following the president’s lead.Texas, where Gov. Greg Abbott expressed a preference for leaving such initiatives to local authorities, remains the largest state in the country without such an order; it has about 4,000 coronavirus cases, significantly fewer than Florida.At least 101 people have died in Florida, and testing, especially of younger and asymptomatic people, remains insufficient.Photos of crowded beaches and megachurches shared on social media over the weekend prompted national outrage directed at Florida, which has blamed its outbreak in part on outsiders. The sheriff in Hillsborough County, which includes Tampa, had a Pentecostal pastor arrested on Monday for recklessly endangering hundreds of parishioners he beckoned to church.So Mr. DeSantis’s stay-at-home order, even though it lists many exceptions and does not close public beaches, came as a relief to public health officials and hospital administrators who had been clamoring for stronger efforts to keep people home.“I am very happy to hear this news,” said Dr. Lawrence Antonucci, president and chief executive of the Lee Health hospital system in Fort Myers. “This should help tremendously in slowing the spread of Covid-19 in Florida.”The coronavirus poses a unique risk for Florida because a quarter of the state’s population of more than 21 million is older than 60, a percentage surpassed only by Maine. The economy relies in large part on an $86 billion-a-year tourism industry fueled by 125 million annual visitors, including young spring break visitors who may have helped spread the virus.“Obviously in Florida, the tourism is totally shot right now,” Mr. DeSantis said.The governor has been reluctant to break with Mr. Trump, according to Republican officials, after the president helped him win the Republican primary and then the governorship in 2018. Their close relationship has weighed on the president throughout the federal response to the coronavirus threat: A newly declared Florida resident, Mr. Trump sees the state as vital to his re-election, and he has been responsive to Mr. DeSantis’s requests for such things as drive-through testing sites and protective equipment for health care workers. They have spoken by phone four times in the past week, according to the governor’s public schedule.As the Trump administration has put a spotlight on the spiraling number of coronavirus cases in New York and New Jersey, Mr. DeSantis has until now tried to frame the state’s outbreak as primarily a problem for Miami, Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach.Those areas are home to more than half of the state’s infections, including six deaths at a single assisted-living facility. The governor repeatedly pointed to the fact that millions of visitors arrive to South Florida from abroad — and from New York.His initial plan was to flood the hardest-hit region with testing sites and a field hospital, and try to limit new travelers. The White House listened. Florida has received material for three testing sites and four shipments from the federal stockpile of supplies, including 500,000 N95 masks, 250,000 face shields, 714,000 gloves, 1.2 million surgical masks and 200,000 gowns.Last week, Mr. DeSantis imposed a quarantine on travelers from the New York area. Then, on Saturday morning, he phoned Mr. Trump and complained that New Yorkers flocking to Fort Lauderdale and other nearby cities were still bringing the virus with them. Mr. Trump responded on Twitter, saying that he was considering a quarantine of the New York tristate area, a statement that flummoxed officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.People in Florida and elsewhere continued to travel widely during the week of March 23, potentially exposing more people to the coronavirus, phone data shows.The president’s aides — some of whom have tired of Mr. DeSantis’s special requests and believe he takes advantage of the relationship with the White House — tried to explain to the president that it would be almost impossible to enforce such a quarantine. Mr. Trump has also resisted a broader national stay-at-home order, which his advisers see as at odds with years of Republican orthodoxy about states’ rights, and unfair to states that are not experiencing major outbreaks.On Sunday, the White House dropped its earlier, rosier suggestion that stringent social-distancing measures could be lifted by mid-April, and extended national guidelines to combat the coronavirus until April 30. And on Tuesday, Mr. Trump sounded a distinctly somber note, as he acknowledged for the first time that the next two weeks will be “painful” and allowed that predictions of more than 100,000 deaths were realistic possibilities.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Still, when Mr. DeSantis on Monday signed a more limited stay-at-home order for four counties from Key West to Palm Beach, he insisted that it would be needed only through April 15. Because most of the affected cities and counties, like other large jurisdictions in the state, had already enacted their own orders, the governor conceded his own action was of little consequence.Cellphone location data showed that people in places like Jacksonville and Daytona Beach in northeast Florida, which were not on lockdown, were frequently traveling across county lines. Commissioners in southwest Florida’s Lee County, which likewise had no stay-at-home order, maintained that they did not need one, in part because the governor had not suggested it.“It seems like he’s listening to the Florida Chamber and Associated Industries and business interests more than he is to medical professionals and health care professionals, which is incredibly disappointing,” Mayor Rick Kriseman of St. Petersburg said before the governor’s latest order. He added that neither the governor nor his staff had called at any point to ask about the city’s needs.“I may not have agreed on a whole lot of things with Rick Scott when he was governor,” said Mr. Kriseman, a Democrat. “But every time there was a storm approaching the state, I got a phone call from him saying, ‘Just wanted to check in, see how you’re doing, is there anything you need?’” (Mr. Scott, now the state’s junior Republican senator, called him on Saturday.)In an attempt to stop the spread of the coronavirus, a vast majority of states and the Navajo Nation have given directives, affecting more than nine in 10 U.S. residents.On Monday afternoon, Dr. Scott Rivkees, the Florida surgeon general, spoke with Dr. Ali H. Mokdad, a professor of health metrics sciences and chief strategy officer for population health at the University of Washington, Dr. Mokdad said. Dr. Mokdad, who keeps a home in Daytona Beach, said he recommended that Florida issue a statewide stay-at-home order.“I told him, ‘Listen, they are working very well here in Washington State,’” he said. “‘You could save a lot of lives there, and you could spare your hospitals a big and heavy demand.’”“They could have saved lives — all of us, even in Seattle — if we’d enacted these measures earlier on,” Dr. Mokdad added. “Everybody made, in a way, a belated response.”On Tuesday, shortly before Mr. Trump’s grim coronavirus news briefing, Mr. DeSantis said one reason he had not extended the order statewide was because the White House coronavirus task force had made no such recommendation.By the time Mr. DeSantis and Mr. Trump spoke on Wednesday, Mr. DeSantis, now under intense public pressure from local officials, Democrats and a growing chorus of national commentators, had come to the conclusion that he needed to do more. When he had decided initially that it would be necessary to focus only on infections flaring in South Florida, he said, the president had backed him.“But at the same time, he understood that this is another 30-day situation,” he said. “You’ve got to just do what makes the most sense.”