Midwest Mayors Debated When to Reopen in a Frank Call
By John EligonKANSAS CITY, Mo. — When should businesses reopen? What should be done about residents who ignore stay-at-home orders? Is it possible to balance the restlessness of those stuck inside with the dire predictions of public health experts?These questions and others are keeping public officials up at night across America. It’s joblessness versus sickness. It’s cabin fever versus the risk of a real fever.That debate is particularly contentious in the Kansas City, Mo., metropolitan area. The philosophies of various leaders collide across two states — Missouri and Kansas — as well as multiple counties and cities. Some places are set to reopen May 3. Others have picked May 15 as the earliest possible date to begin flipping the switch back on.The different views — open up now! let’s wait! — played out with candor on Thursday morning during a conference call of elected officials and public health experts in the Kansas City region. The New York Times was invited by a participant to listen to the call, which provided a behind-the-scenes look at how these discussions are unfolding nationwide.The push-and-pull was as much about deciding what restrictions to lift or introduce as it was about how to sell those decisions to the public. (The conversation has been condensed and lightly edited.)After public health officials spoke for about 30 minutes and made clear the region was not in the clear yet because of an expected uptick in cases in rural communities, Stephen Arbo, the city manager in Lee’s Summit, Mo., questioned how the public might react to this news.“I’ve seen the tremendous pressure that’s being put on our elected officials to have a relaxation of the stay-at-home order on an earlier basis. People are finding their own sources of information or they are following the encouragement that they’re seeing on a national level to relax the stay-at-home orders as early as possible.” “Frankly, I think we’re in a bad spot right now where there’s a lot of pressure on our elected officials who ultimately make the decisions on the stay-at-home orders. I don’t think we’re giving them the level of information and material either to convince them to continue the dates that have been put forth, or to help them understand all of the risks that are involved.”Several Missouri counties that include parts of Kansas City said last week that their stay-at-home orders would be extended to May 15. But this week, Clay County reversed course and announced it was ending its orders on May 3, which Cass County also decided to target. Jackson County has kept its stay-at-home order effective until May 15, as has the city itself.Carson Ross, the mayor of Blue Springs, Mo., in Jackson County, worried about the conflicting dates.“I am getting pushback from my constituents. All these different stay-at-home dates makes for confusion. I’m also afraid that after May 3 there will be a compliance issue. People will start to reject the May 15 date, and when that happens, I have to ask what will we accomplish? My guess, to answer my question, is absolutely nothing. We’ve got to get on the same page. That’s the problem. Sometimes, if it’s confusing to us as elected officials, it’s certainly confusing to our constituents.”Carol Suter, the mayor of Gladstone, Mo., which is in Clay County, said the decision to reopen on May 3 was based not on politics but on recommendations from the county’s health department. That date aligned with states like Kansas and Colorado, she said, and most communities in the region were on board with May 3.“There seems to be a lot of macro regional consensus around the third. What we’re starting to see is that lack of voluntarism. There’s no way to enforce this stuff, so you have to have the confidence of the population to voluntarily comply with these rules. As I drive around and as I’ve observed, even in my own neighborhoods, we’re starting to lose that.” “We already know there are businesses in the region who are open who shouldn’t be. We can have great medical, very technical explanations, which we’ve just gotten, which are impossible to communicate to the population in general as justifications.”A better course, Mayor Suter continued, would be to appeal to residents’ good senses.“To encourage people going forward to really act on their own sense of personal responsibility and accountability for their own health. If you’re vulnerable, stay in. If you’re a business owner and you can’t provide a safe environment for your employees, don’t open. Have people work from home. To try and continue long-term deadlines is going to be a losing game.”Dr. K. Allen Greiner, the medical officer for Wyandotte County, which includes Kansas City, Kan., cautioned against moving too quickly.“As everybody knows, the public health officers are on record with the May 15 date. That’s based on public health science. It’s a compromise already. There’s a lot of public health science that suggests you should actually wait two incubation periods to assess whether an outbreak has been completely controlled.”“If we are in a situation that we’ve got to keep compromising — which worries me medically and from a public health perspective — we have to have staged stay-at-home information that, in the first stage, really doesn’t change much of anything.” “It is all about personal responsibility and safety and saving lives.”Quinton Lucas, the mayor of Kansas City, Mo., the largest city in the region, said public safety — not confusion over the dates — should guide the decisions they were making.“A few things on the call give me grave concern.”“I just can’t candidly say, ‘Well to hell with the fact that we don’t have a proper setup yet for testing, that we don’t have a proper setup for how we’re dealing with our social determinants of health disparities.’ And what I cannot simply say is, ‘Well, good luck to everybody over 60 or overweight in Kansas City, Mo., with some higher likelihood of infection,’ because that’s a heck of a lot of us.”The mayor added that he had friends who were happy their gyms were scheduled to reopen on May 4, and that such optimism has made the jobs of elected officials even tougher.“We have lost actually the narrative such that it’s going to be very hard for any of us, either elected or public health officials, to actually kind of pull back in and say, ‘Well, maybe the tattoo parlors, the gyms, everything does not need to open on Day 1.’ I think in some ways that’s the brilliance of May 15. It does allow us to at least have time to say, ‘What does winding down look like?’ rather than just a, ‘Let’s be fair to every business.’”“I get that it’s difficult. I think that’s kind of our jobs is to actually make sure we’re giving that messaging of what are the necessary steps to protect public health, rather than doing a kind of, school’s out on May 4 or May 16 that leaves us in, I think, a more precarious situation.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Mayor Ross of Blue Springs responded.“I appreciate what you’re saying, Mayor Lucas, but again, if you have noncompliance, a date doesn’t make any difference. That’s what we’re all dealing with as elected officials. But again, I also listen to my constituents and what they’re saying. And matter of fact, I just got a text that just came and said, ‘We’re adults.’ And I understand that. ‘We can take care of ourselves.’ So you’re going to get those kinds of things. But again, my big issue is the confusion by the different dates.And Mayor Lucas of Kansas City, Mo., weighed in again.“I have a city with a lot of crime, so maybe I’m used to some percentage of noncompliance, which is, for better or worse, what we have to deal with. We always know when we write laws and order them that there may be some noncompliance. I think arguing that we won’t have total compliance actually in some ways gets away from what we’re trying to do. We’re trying to deter people from doing the sort of things that will be detrimental to the broader public.” “To the extent there is confusion, I hear you. I think that the problem is that we’re one of those big jurisdictions that’s a confusion actor — i.e., we’re creating it. What I’m not comfortable saying right now is that as of today, Kansas City, Mo., is just going to move to May 3 to make it all easier for everybody else. I don’t know if any public health information suggests that that’s accurate.”Eileen Weir, the mayor of Independence, Mo., asked the other elected leaders if they would plainly accept the recommendations of the public health experts advising the group.“Eight days ago, our health directors laid out a set of criteria about what is recommended, the benchmarks that we need to hit to start relaxing the stay-at-home order gradually. Nobody is suggesting that we are going to go from where we are now to where we were on March 11. I think the responsibility of this group is to provide that direction. I would like to ask if we have consensus to accept what was presented to us eight days ago by our health departments about the criteria that needs to be met?”Mr. Arbo, the Lee’s Summit city manager, replied.“I wonder if there really is consensus with that. I think that there’s different perspectives.”“I do think we’re going to have to show some kind of movement off the May 15 date. I know that that would be a difficult thing to do if it was misunderstood. But I would like to begin seeing if there was some common date, like May 9 or 10, that we start putting in Phase 1, which may frankly not be much different than the stay-at-home orders.” “Maybe the city halls open back up, but they’re under controlled environments. If we could just show some kind of movement, some kind of relaxation that doesn’t put the society at threat or increase the chance of the spread or put our vulnerable populations at risk, I think we could get compliance for that next week or two weeks or three weeks that we need. But if we just stand firm on May 15 and we have people all around us that are going May 3 and opening up their places, we’re not going to be able to hang on to the May 15 date.”