New York Officials Weigh Delaying April Primary Election
By Stephanie Saul and Nick CorasanitiNew York officials are considering plans to postpone the state’s presidential primary election in April as fears over the coronavirus outbreak grow and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention cautioned against gatherings of more than 50 people. Douglas A. Kellner, co-chair of the New York State Board of Elections, confirmed on Sunday that discussions were underway about the possibility of delaying the primary from April 28 to June 23 in the interest of containing the virus’s spread, but he added that no final decision had been reached. The decision ultimately would rest with the governor and the State Legislature, he said in an interview.The discussions are underway as two states — Louisiana and Georgia — have already postponed their primaries and other states are weighing various delays or mail-in balloting measures to protect the public from exposure to the illness. Democratic Party officials in Puerto Rico, a United States territory, said they would request a postponement of their primary from March 29 to April 26. “The safety of every citizen is paramount,” the party said in a news release Sunday. As four states — Ohio, Arizona, Florida and Illinois — have said they plan to go forward with voting on Tuesday amid concerns about the spread of the virus, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont raised questions on Sunday night about the wisdom of proceeding. During an interview after the presidential debate, CNN’s Anderson Cooper asked Mr. Sanders whether he thought the primaries should go forward as planned. “That is a very good question,” Mr. Sanders responded. “As you know, Louisiana and Georgia and Puerto Rico have delayed their elections, postponed until dates in the future. Look, you know, elections, dates are very important.” He added, “We don’t want to be getting in the habit of messing around with them,” and recalled the cancellation of an election in New York after the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks. “I would hope governors listen to the public health experts and what they are saying is, you just indicated, we don’t want gatherings of more than 50 people,” Mr. Sanders said. “I’m thinking about some of the elderly people sitting behind the desks, registering people, all that stuff. It does not make a lot of sense. I’m not sure that it does.” The four states that are scheduled to hold primaries on Tuesday issued a joint statement on Friday expressing confidence that ballots could be safely cast and reconfirmed their plans on Saturday.On Sunday night, after the new recommendations from the C.D.C., a spokesman from the Illinois secretary of state’s office said that “as of now, we are still on for Tuesday.” “We’ve now had 38 days of early voting and hundreds of thousands of vote-by-mail ballots have been issued,” said the spokesman, Matt Dietrich. “We continue to encourage voters to help mitigate Election Day traffic by early voting on Monday.”He added that “voters are urged to maintain proper distance between themselves and other voters.”In New York, Mr. Kellner, the elections board co-chair and a Manhattan lawyer, said he was in favor of moving the election to June 23 — the day of another already scheduled statewide vote.“Why? There’s no compelling reason to have the presidential primary election in April apart from the other election,” Mr. Kellner said. He added that it was likely that the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee would be decided by late April and, if not, the June 23 election date still fell before the Democratic National Convention in Milwaukee in July.Many officials do not regard a postponement as immediately necessary, Mr. Kellner said, adding that a decision could be delayed for two weeks, when more information will be available.There is no Republican presidential primary being held in New York this year. Other than the Democratic presidential nominating vote, other state and federal primary balloting in New York is scheduled for June 23.In another development, Mayor Bill de Blasio on Sunday announced the cancellation of a March 24 special election for borough president in Queens, saying it was necessary to protect poll workers and the public. “In a democratic society, the cancellation of an election is such a rarity,” Mr. de Blasio said at a news conference. “It should be avoided at all costs. But in this case, with the nature of this crisis, I’ve come to the decision that it’s necessary.” Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.In the past few days, elections officials around the country have been considering various changes in their elections schedules to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, with several others believed to be considering a delay or moving to mail-in balloting.Mr. Kellner, a Democrat, said state officials had also been reviewing the possibility of the broader use of absentee ballots in New York for the primary.“The state board of elections already has on its website an application for military and overseas voters to download their ballots,” Mr. Kellner said. “We are actively considering what has to be done to scale that up so that people would be able to download absentee ballots over the internet. They would still have to mail them back if one were to go into that direction.”He said that officials were currently evaluating how long it would take to carry out that change — an answer they expect to have this week.Richard Azzopardi, a senior adviser to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, denied that there had been any discussions about moving the state’s primary.Mr. Cuomo, though, had recently taken several interim steps to minimize coronavirus exposure in the elections process, including reducing the number of signatures required on petitions that candidates for state and federal offices need to be placed on the ballot for the June 23 primary — a move he said was an effort to limit door-to-door canvassing.In a statement on Sunday, the Democratic National Committee said a delay in New York’s election to June 23 would violate its rules requiring that all states hold their primaries by June 9, but added, “We will continue to work with every state party as they adjust their delegate selection plans around coronavirus.”The party has said that any rules violation could potentially result in a state losing half its delegates, but would have to be reviewed by the party’s rules and bylaws committee.