Police Officer Charged With Murder in Killing of Handcuffed Suspect in Maryland
By Neil Vigdor, Mariel Padilla and Sandra E. GarciaA police corporal in Maryland was charged with second-degree murder on Tuesday in the fatal shooting of a suspect who had been handcuffed in the front passenger seat of his patrol car the previous night, the authorities said.The corporal, Michael Owen Jr., a 10-year veteran of the Prince George’s Police Department, shot William H. Green seven times after a traffic stop on Monday night in Temple Hills, Md., on the outskirts of Washington, Henry P. Stawinski III, the county police chief, said Tuesday evening at a news conference.Corporal Owen and another officer had been responding to a series of motor vehicle accidents in which Mr. Green, 43, had hit several cars and was suspected of being under the influence of an unknown substance, the chief said.The officers had been waiting for another officer to arrive to evaluate Mr. Green for drugs when Corporal Owen opened fire, according to the chief, who said Mr. Green’s hands were cuffed behind his back at the time.“I have concluded that what happened last night is a crime,” Chief Stawinski said. “There are no circumstances under which this outcome is acceptable.”Corporal Owen was also charged with voluntary and involuntary manslaughter, first-degree assault and use of a firearm to commit a violent crime, said the authorities, who on Tuesday walked back an initial police account that witnesses told them a struggle had preceded the shooting.“That was not corroborated,” Chief Stawinski said.The shooting of Mr. Green, a father of two who lived in Southeast Washington and whose family said he worked for Megabus, drew condemnation from the American Civil Liberties Union. It also recalled previous fatal shootings by the police in Prince George’s County, where the majority of residents are black.“There is no reason why a handcuffed person should ever be shot multiple times by a police officer, let alone shot multiple times inside a patrol car,” Deborah Jeon, the legal director for the A.C.L.U. of Maryland, said in a statement on Tuesday.Mr. Green’s family said he was not a violent person.“Since the day he was born he was the most gentle, sweetest, kindest,” Mr. Green’s cousin Juanita Sharma said in an interview on Tuesday. “He loved his mother and he loved his family,” she said. “He showed love to his family.”Corporal Owen, who was placed on administrative leave, was taken into custody on Tuesday and is expected to appear in court for a bond hearing in the next few days. It was not immediately clear if he had a lawyer.The president of Lodge 89 of the Fraternal Order of Police, which represents Prince George’s County officers, did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Tuesday night.Prince George’s County officials said they were in the process of getting body cameras for police officers. Corporal Owen was not wearing one at the time of the shooting.In 2011, the department placed Corporal Owen, an officer at the time, on administrative leave after he shot and killed a Landover, Md., man who the police said had pointed a gun at him. Corporal Owen had pulled over to the side of the road to check on the man, who was lying in the grass, police said.In the early 2000s, the United States Department of Justice investigated the Prince George’s County Police Department over a spate excessive force complaints and the department’s canine unit procedures.The parallel investigations led to a memorandum of understanding between the Justice Department and the county police, which agreed to create a review board for firearm discharge cases and a risk management system for officers’ performance. The police department also agreed to investigate and review misconduct allegations.During the news conference on Tuesday, a local resident confronted county officials about police shootings.“We understand you’re upset,” Angela D. Alsobrooks, the Prince George’s County executive, said. “We get it. I promise you we will not minimize it.”Sheelagh McNeill contributed research.