Be Wary of Those Texts From a Friend of a Friend’s Aunt
By Mihir ZaveriThe text messages have largely followed a pattern: The author claims to have a connection to someone working at a clinic or government agency — an aunt, a neighbor, a friend’s cousin — who has revealed unannounced plans for an impending lockdown or quarantine. They’re passing along a warning, telling recipients of the urgent need to stockpile food, gas, medicine or other necessities. They often contain pleas that they be forwarded to others.And none of them are true.The texts are sometimes laced with elements of truth, making their false conclusions seem plausible, especially as every passing hour seems to bring a dramatic shift to the way the coronavirus is changing our everyday lives.The latest such message spread on Sunday, prompting an announcement from the National Security Council: “Text message rumors of a national #quarantine are FAKE,” it said in a tweet on Sunday, just before midnight. “There is no national lockdown.”Text message rumors of a national #quarantine are FAKE. There is no national lockdown. @CDCgov has and will continue to post the latest guidance on #COVID19. #coronavirusWith the rapid spread of the coronavirus across the world, misinformation has followed suit. Other messages in recent weeks, reflecting the same pattern, have warned that New York City public transit would shut down last week (it’s still running), or that the entire Pacific Northwest would be quarantined last week (also not true). At least one message said that President Trump would declare a national emergency within three days — Mr. Trump declared the emergency on Friday, but that did not give him the power to impose a national quarantine.The World Health Organization has warned of an “infodemic” and is trying to fight rumors and falsehoods on the internet about the coronavirus. Social media companies like Facebook and Twitter are racing to remove misinformation about the virus from their platforms, often unsuccessfully.Text messages, however, can pose a particular problem, said Graham Brookie, the director and managing editor of the Digital Forensic Research Lab at the Atlantic Council. He said text messages are usually a trusted medium, in part because the sender needs to know the recipient’s phone number. They cannot be as easily forwarded as messages on other social media, like WhatsApp messages or Facebook posts.“It’s a little bit more intentional,” he said.By sourcing information to a relative or friend of a friend, the messages appear to be conversational and accessible while maintaining a “facade of credibility,” he said.The disinformation follows a familiar playbook used on other social media, old-fashioned chain letters and emails: asking the recipient to forward the message to others, Mr. Brookie said.“It’s the latest version of that threat,” he said. “It’s not something that is new, but it is something that is effective.”It’s not immediately clear who was responsible for the mass text messages on Sunday, or any of the others, according to Mr. Brookie, who was an adviser at the council until 2017. Text messages are hard to track, because data about them, kept by companies like AT&T or Verizon, is not necessarily accessible to the public, he said.One of the few ways to track text messages is through crowdsourced reports on social media.“We don’t know where they are coming from, which is one of the main vulnerabilities here,” Mr. Brookie said. “It could be anything from your everyday scammer to a hostile nation-state.”At an afternoon news conference on Monday, Mr. Trump said while regional lockdowns or quarantines may be possible, he was not considering a similar nationwide measure. Asked if the rumors were part of a foreign disinformation campaign, Mr. Trump said he could not say, adding that the media had been “very fair.”“It could be that you have some foreign groups that are playing games, but it doesn’t matter,” he said.And not knowing where the messages are coming from also makes it harder to ascertain the goal of the messages. Because the messages are urging people to stockpile goods, the goal could be financial gain, Mr. Brookie said. Or it could be to stoke chaos and confusion across the country, he added.Mr. Brookie said people receiving text messages about the coronavirus should verify the source of the message as well as the source’s source. He said people should check for biases in the message.“Does something feel like it’s trying to scare you?” he said. “Is it claiming it has all the facts while others don’t? Is it jumping to conclusions that you haven’t seen in other places? Is it using rhetorical tools in order to persuade you of something?”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.He added, “if it’s not pointing to the latest, verified science-based information, like coronavirus.gov, then absolutely think twice about it.”The government also had the ability to text people directly through a warning system, if it chose to, he said.“There’s no indication that that system has been used in response to the coronavirus,” he said.Pay attention to what the official sources are telling you. “If it’s not coming from my mouth, don’t believe it,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Thursday, trying to calm rumors.Public officials should play an active role in combating rumors and disinformation, he said.Still, many have questioned how much official government channels can be trusted.Mr. Trump has been criticized for playing down the outbreak in the early stages and repeatedly making assertions — including about the accessibility of tests — that were either overstated or inaccurate.Over all, trust in institutions is down, Mr. Brookie said.