Warren, Bloomberg and Rivals Agree: Trump Is ‘Not Ready’ for Coronavirus
By Rebecca R. RuizSenator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts called Wednesday for the federal government to redirect money from the construction of President Trump’s border wall and put it toward the containment of the fast-spreading coronavirus.“I’m going to be introducing a plan tomorrow to take every dime that the president is now taking to spend on his racist wall at the southern border and divert it to the coronavirus,” Ms. Warren said on a CNN town hall program from Charleston, S.C., joining her opponents in the Democratic presidential primary in excoriating the Trump administration’s response to the threat.The criticism came just after Mr. Trump held a news conference about the virus, and as American health authorities braced for an outbreak in the United States, with a new case confirmed in California with no apparent links to travel abroad.Three days before the South Carolina Democratic primary, the candidates seemed to unite, momentarily, around a message while selling their own public-health savvy.“The president is not ready for this kind of thing,” Michael R. Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor, said at his own CNN town hall while Mr. Trump was still speaking in the White House briefing room. “He has left us very exposed.”Two other candidates who were also appearing on CNN took similar aim at the president, insisting that they would do a better job in containing the virus. While Mr. Bloomberg brandished his experience leading New York City through the swine flu outbreak in 2009, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. invoked his time in the Obama administration as it worked to contain the Ebola virus in 2014.“Were I president now,” Mr. Biden said of the coronavirus, “I’d insist that China allow our scientists in to make a hard determination of how it started, where it’s from, how far along it is. Because that is not happening now.”Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota questioned Mr. Trump’s decision to put Vice President Mike Pence in charge of the administration’s response to the outbreak, which has disrupted supply chains and prompted a stock sell-off.“I would think usually you might put a medical professional in charge,” Ms. Klobuchar said, though she acknowledged that the vice president’s involvement might help to elevate the effort. (President Barack Obama named Ron Klain, a Democratic operative, to coordinate the government’s response to the Ebola virus.)While calling out the president’s proposed cuts to funding for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Ms. Klobuchar also delivered faint praise of Mr. Trump’s choice to invite the agency’s principal deputy director to address the nation alongside him. “He did do it with the C.D.C.,” she said. “I think that’s important, because I believe in science.”Ms. Warren in recent days has pointed to a plan she released weeks ago focused on combating infectious disease outbreaks. On Wednesday she escalated her proposal, with the specific suggestion of redirecting the border-wall money to address the outbreak.“We know that with any virus that develops, the most vulnerable will be our children, seniors, people with compromised immune systems,” she said. “This one is tough.”Mr. Bloomberg, too, planned to step up his message on Thursday, when his campaign will begin airing a new television ad nationally that is focused on the virus. “Health experts warn the U.S. is underprepared,” the ad begins. “Managing a crisis is what Mike Bloomberg does.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Announcing the commercial Wednesday, Mr. Bloomberg’s campaign tore into the president. “Trump is putting American lives at risk every day, ignoring science, claiming the virus will ‘miraculously’ disappear by April and relying on ‘warm weather’ to end the spread of the virus,” the campaign said in a news release.On Wednesday, Mr. Trump issued a message on Twitter criticizing the news media for “doing everything possible to make the Caronavirus look as bad as possible, including panicking markets, if possible.” He added, “Likewise their incompetent Do Nothing Democrat comrades are all talk, no action.”Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, the front-runner in the Democratic race, was not among the candidates participating in the CNN town halls on Wednesday, but he has also called Mr. Trump ill informed about the virus.“In the White House today, we have a self-described ‘great genius’ — self-described,” Mr. Sanders said at the Democratic debate on Tuesday. “This great genius has told us that this coronavirus is going to end in two months. April is the magical date that this great scientist we have in the White House has determined.”Mr. Bloomberg reacted with a similarly sarcastic tone on Wednesday. “Oh, I feel so much better,” he said. “No.”