Berkshire Hathaway Lost $49.7 Billion in First Quarter Stung by Coronavirus
By Michael J. de la Merced and Matt PhillipsNot even Warren E. Buffett was spared financially from the coronavirus, as his conglomerate, Berkshire Hathaway, reported a $49.7 billion loss in the first quarter on Saturday, reflecting the outbreak’s toll on an investment portfolio that includes big stakes in major airlines and financial firms.The loss was Berkshire’s biggest ever and a sharp swing from a $21.7 billion profit in the same quarter a year earlier. The conglomerate’s vast array of investments exposed it — and Mr. Buffett, long considered one of the world’s top investors — to huge swaths of the battered American economy.Its total investment loss for the quarter, without accounting for operating earnings, was $54.5 billion. By comparison, its investment gain in all of 2019 was $56.3 billion.Berkshire said it continued to sell stock in April, totaling $6.5 billion, plowing that money primarily into supersafe Treasury bills. Later Saturday, at his annual shareholders meeting, Mr. Buffett suggested that some of those sales involved Berkshire’s reversing its roughly 10 percent in the four largest U.S. airlines.Berkshire’s investment loss tracked the overall slide in stock markets: The S&P 500 dropped 20 percent in the first quarter. (The company’s biggest holdings are also mainstays of the S&P 500: American Express, Apple, Bank of America, Coca-Cola and Wells Fargo, with those stakes amounting to nearly $125 billion.)The loss overshadowed a 6 percent rise in Berkshire’s operating earnings, which track the performance of the company’s owned-and-operated businesses like the insurer Geico. Mr. Buffett regards that as a better measure of the company’s overall performance and has long argued that quarterly paper gains or losses on its investments “are often meaningless” in understanding its overall health.But it is hard to ignore the damage to a portfolio that includes stakes in financial firms like Bank of America and American Express, both of which reported steep drops in earnings for the first quarter, and four of the biggest U.S. airlines. (Berkshire also disclosed that the value of its stake in Kraft Heinz on its books exceeds the market value of that holding by about 40 percent, and warned that it might have to take a write-down on the investment in the future.)Even some of the conglomerate’s wholly owned businesses, like the Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad and retailers like See’s Candy, were hurt by the lockdowns that have shaken the U.S. economy. Still, Geico reported a 28 percent gain for the quarter, to $984 million, while Berkshire’s overall insurance investment profits rose modestly because of increased dividend income for the company.The first-quarter results, in which Berkshire reported having $137.3 billion in cash, were released ahead of its first-ever online-only shareholder meeting. Sometimes described as a kind of Woodstock for capitalists, the meeting is usually a weekend-long Omaha extravaganza celebrating all things Buffett and Berkshire.This year, it was a decidedly more subdued affair, reflecting the limits on mass gatherings and travel of the Covid-crisis era. Mr. Buffett’s longtime business partner, 96-year-old Charlie Munger, did not attend, staying at home in Los Angeles.“It just didn’t seem like a good idea to have him make the trip to Omaha,” Mr. Buffett said, adding, “Charlie is in fine shape, and he’ll be back next year.”Mr. Buffett was joined instead by Greg Abel, Berkshire’s vice chairman overseeing all of the company’s non-insurance companies, who sat at a separate desk some distance from Mr. Buffett.Instead of facing thousands of adoring and affluent shareholders, Mr. Buffett, noting that he hadn’t had a haircut in seven weeks, held forth in an almost completely vacant Omaha arena that seats more than 17,000, as his comments were livestreamed.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Discussing the breakdown in the financial markets that prompted the Federal Reserve to drastically ramp up efforts to pump in fresh cash, he said, “We came very close to having a total freeze of credit.”When it came to Berkshire’s stake in the airlines, Mr. Buffett said, “I just decided that I’d made a mistake.”