Marc Benioff’s $25 Million Blitz to Buy Protective Gear From China
Supported byBy David GellesSam Hawgood, the chancellor of the University of California, San Francisco, was getting concerned.It was March 19, coronavirus cases in California were rising at an alarming rate, and U.C.S.F., one of the Bay Area’s major medical providers, was already running perilously low on personal protective equipment.The university’s usual suppliers in the United States were short on masks and face shields, and there was no sign that the State of California or the federal government was coming to the rescue. “The supply chain had really dried up,” Mr. Hawgood said.So Mr. Hawgood called Marc Benioff, the hyperconnected billionaire who is a founder and the chief executive of Salesforce.In some ways, it was the natural call to make. Mr. Benioff gave the university $100 million to build a children’s hospital in 2010 and remained a major benefactor. But there was no reason to think Mr. Benioff, who runs an enterprise software company, could quickly muster a supply chain for personal protective equipment, especially during a global pandemic.Nonetheless, that phone call set off a frenzied effort by Mr. Benioff and his team that drew in major companies like FedEx, Walmart, Uber and Alibaba. In a matter of weeks, the team spent more than $25 million to procure more than 50 million pieces of protective equipment. Fifteen million units have already been delivered to hospitals, medical facilities and states, and more are on the way.The relative ease with which Salesforce acquired so much protective gear stands in sharp contrast to the often chaotic government efforts. While states have had to compete against one another for scarce supplies and the strategic national stockpile of protective gear is depleted, Mr. Benioff and his team simply called up their business partners in China and started writing checks.Other Silicon Valley executives, including Tim Cook of Apple, have also tapped their connections to help get needed supplies to hospitals. Jack Dorsey, chief executive of Twitter, pledged $1 billion to fight the coronavirus. And many individuals and companies with vested interests in China have begun similar campaigns.After Mr. Benioff got off the call with Mr. Hawgood on that Thursday, he called Daniel Zhang, chief executive of Alibaba, the enormous e-commerce marketplace. Last year, Salesforce and Alibaba announced a partnership meant to give Salesforce customers better access to the Chinese market, and teams from the two companies had been working closely.Mr. Benioff told Mr. Zhang that U.C.S.F., an institution he cared deeply about, was in need. Mr. Zhang said he would help.In San Francisco, Mr. Benioff tapped Ryan Aytay, one of the chief executives of Quip, a Salesforce productivity tool, to lead the effort. When Mr. Aytay reached out to his contacts at Alibaba that same day, they had already received the message from Mr. Zhang.Within hours, the teams from Salesforce and Alibaba began collaborating, with the Alibaba employees identifying trusted suppliers that might be able to fulfill Salesforce’s requests.Mr. Aytay got in touch with Mr. Hawgood, who said U.C.S.F. needed masks, gowns, face shields and swabs. With Mr. Benioff’s approval, Mr. Aytay realigned his 25-person team to focus exclusively on the effort and brought in colleagues from other Salesforce departments.Buying the gear was one thing, but getting it to the United States would be another. “Initially, I thought we were going to be able to use the U.S. military to bring it in,” Mr. Benioff said. “That was naïve on my part.”Realizing he would need to charter planes and trucks, and hoping to speed things along, Mr. Benioff reached out to Fred Smith, the founder of FedEx, who put the Salesforce team in touch with his son, Richard Smith, a high-ranking FedEx executive.In San Francisco, Mr. Aytay and his team decided to buy only from companies that someone they knew well could personally vouch for. “Setting up a trust network was very important,” Mr. Aytay said.By March 22, the Salesforce team identified the first promising tip. The Jointown Pharmaceutical Group, a large Chinese company, had 500,000 surgical masks in a warehouse in Los Angeles.But when Mr. Aytay called the Jointown office in China, no one there spoke English. Mr. Aytay had a member of his team who spoke Mandarin call back and negotiate the deal, and they soon agreed to buy all the masks for $300,000. The money was wired directly from Mr. Benioff’s family office that day.Three days later, on March 25, the masks arrived at U.C.S.F. on trucks that FedEx provided at a discounted rate.Once it was apparent that the Salesforce team could obtain and deliver supplies, it took steps to formalize its efforts and set a lofty target.“We did the math when we started, and thought we were going to acquire a billion pieces of P.P.E.,” Mr. Benioff said.It was a typically ambitious goal from Mr. Benioff. This year, he led an effort to plant one trillion trees.The Salesforce team set up a website, www.1bppe.com, (the b is for billion) to obtain leads and give Mr. Aytay a new email address, since his Salesforce inbox was overloaded. It set up a daily meeting with U.C.S.F. to monitor progress. And the team gave itself a name: Maskforce.On Friday, March 27, Mr. Benioff joined a weekly call organized by the Business Roundtable, a lobbying group. With about 100 other chief executives on the line, he described his efforts and said that if any others wanted to help, or knew of hospitals that desperately needed supplies, they could call him.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Soon after that, Mr. Benioff got a text from Virginia M. Rometty, a former chief executive of IBM, who said hospitals in New York were in dire need of equipment. Mr. Aytay and his team had been buying more gear in China, and within days a 747 was on its way to New York, full of medical supplies.But when the plane landed, Mr. Aytay’s contacts at the Federal Emergency Management Agency and in New York said that instead of going directly to hospitals, the equipment should be sent to a warehouse in Albany where New York State was coordinating distribution.There were other setbacks. On March 26, the Salesforce team secured two million surgical masks from a source in Shenzhen, China. But on their way from the warehouse to the airport, 1.5 million went missing.“They were sold right off the truck,” Mr. Aytay said. “It was the Wild Wild West.”(The supplier ultimately fulfilled the order.)Once, Mr. Aytay got a call from a friend who had found 9,500 KN95 masks made by 3M in the Bay Area. Within hours, the masks arrived at Mr. Aytay’s house. He wrote a personal check for about $40,000 to pay for them, and he hired a driver who sometimes takes him to the airport to pick them up and distribute them to hospitals.By March 29, 10 days after Mr. Hawgood called Mr. Benioff, Salesforce had found more than 50 million pieces of protective equipment, with millions already delivered.The work was being noticed.On March 31, Mr. Aytay spoke with California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, and shared his list of suppliers. The next week, President Trump thanked Salesforce for its donations during his daily press briefing.At one point, Mr. Aytay was in his garage talking to an Irish supplier when the supplier asked him to hold. When he came back on the line, he had patched in Bono, the U2 frontman, who wanted to collaborate.The gear continued to arrive. A 747 loaded with protective masks and other equipment landed in San Francisco on April 2. The next week, Uber Freight donated four trailer trucks to help transport equipment from multiple locations to U.C.S.F.The supplies allowed U.C.S.F to institute a mandatory mask policy. “It’s made a huge difference,” Mr. Hawgood said.On April 12, two planes landed in Chicago carrying 1.3 million pieces of protective gear that Salesforce, Walmart and State Farm had bought in China. Mr. Aytay’s team had been in touch with FEMA to identify emerging hot spots.When the planes arrived, Walmart trucks picked up the gear and drove it to Michigan and Louisiana. “We wanted to get gear to underrepresented communities,” Mr. Aytay said.In the last weeks, it has become apparent that early social distancing measures have worked in the San Francisco area, and U.C.S.F. is unlikely to need all the supplies that Salesforce delivered.