With Hollywood Productions on Hold, Documentary Filmmakers Keep Going
By Nicole SperlingJehane Noujaim and Karim Amer know about putting themselves at risk for their work. While they were shooting thousands of hours of footage for “The Square,” the 2013 documentary directed by Ms. Noujaim and produced by Mr. Amer on the popular uprising in Cairo, they were often in the middle of the action in Tahrir Square, where the military shot protesters and dispersed crowds with tear gas. Some of their footage was confiscated, and Ms. Noujaim was arrested and held for 36 hours.Now, amid the coronavirus pandemic, conditions are arguably more difficult, they said.“At the height of the revolution, things got pretty chaotic and our office was raided,” Mr. Amer said. “That was a visible threat. You knew when the army was coming for you. This is not like anything we’ve seen before. This is an invisible threat that’s affecting every single member of the production team.”Still, Ms. Noujaim and Mr. Amer have managed to keep going at a time when Hollywood has closed down film and television productions.After shuttering their 35-person office in Brooklyn, the married couple decamped to a house in the Berkshires, where they have made progress on six projects in various stages of production, including an HBO documentary series on Nxivm, a secretive self-help organization that has been depicted as a sex cult. And they’ve been working while watching over their three children, all under the age of five.“It’s a complete juggling act for everybody,” Ms. Noujaim said.For a project they’re working on with filmmakers around the world on the pandemic’s effects, Mr. Amer visited the U.S. epicenter with a small crew to film one of their subjects, an employee of the Gerard J. Neufeld funeral home in Queens, N.Y., where mortuaries have been overrun.Mr. Amer and Ms. Noujaim are not the only documentary filmmakers who have managed to keep busy at a time when nonfiction programming — Netflix’s “Tiger King,” ESPN’s “The Last Dance,” Apple TV Plus’s “Beastie Boys Story” — has been all the rage for people stuck at home. Unlike directors of dramas and comedies, who are dependent on film sets where social distancing is all but impossible, documentarians can more easily make adjustments.R.J. Cutler, the director of the 2009 documentary “The September Issue” and an upcoming Showtime film on John Belushi, has been collaborating with his editors on Zoom as they complete postproduction work on a documentary for Apple TV Plus about the teenage singer-songwriter Billie Eilish.“We doc filmmakers are an adaptable bunch,” Mr. Cutler said. “We are going to do our best to not be slowed down.”Joe Berlinger, who made the acclaimed 1992 documentary “Brother’s Keeper,” has been racing to complete the first docu-series on Jeffrey Epstein, the billionaire who committed suicide last year in a Manhattan jail cell after he was arrested on sex trafficking charges.Mr. Berlinger, the producer of the Epstein series, has been working remotely with the director Lisa Bryant ever since New York officials enacted stay-at-home orders in March. His team took what they needed from the RadicalMedia office in Manhattan and got to work on color correction, graphics, sound mixing and scoring in their apartments. The series, “Jeffrey Epstein: Filthy Rich,” will be available on Netflix this month.“We felt it was important to be the first one out of the gate,” Mr. Berlinger said.For other projects, Mr. Berlinger started the editing process before filming was done. That unconventional approach has allowed him to stay on schedule.“When you start editing before you finish shooting, it’s not always ideal,” he said. “But we have several series where we shot enough material that we came up with a game plan to keep working.”RadicalMedia is also producing “In This Together,” which captures life during the pandemic. It includes video shot by a nurse and a pregnant Covid-19 patient and will air Friday as part of the nonfiction PBS series “American Portrait.”Long before a national emergency was declared in March, Ron Howard, who made documentaries like “Pavarotti” in addition to features like “A Beautiful Mind,” took on a project that has turned out to be suited to the current crisis: a profile of the chef José Andrés and his World Central Kitchen, a nonprofit that delivers meals to victims of natural disasters. Mr. Andrés has served millions of Americans across the country during the pandemic, which has wiped out over 33 million jobs in the United States.Now at home in Connecticut, Mr. Howard has asked World Central Kitchen staff members to chronicle the experience with iPhones and other cameras. He watches their work daily and advises the ad hoc crew from afar.Updated May 20, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“Right now we are just lucky to be getting footage,” Mr. Howard said. “I’m just trying to deputize them a little bit.”“They don’t work for me, but I’m trying to get them to not only cover the moments but to ask a couple of questions,” he added, “whether it’s to someone receiving food or to understand what the volunteers are going through.”Rudy Valdez had planned to be filming Carlos Santana during a concert tour right now. Instead, the director is doing what he can: conducting audio interviews with his 72-year-old subject for the documentary, which will tell the story of the musician’s life and career. The film is being produced by Imagine Documentaries, a division of Imagine Entertainment, the studio founded by Mr. Howard and Brian Grazer. Imagine Documentaries is also producing “The Day Sports Stood Still,” centered on how pro athletes have been dealing with the crisis.As they work toward completing their latest projects, documentarians are wondering what’s next for them and nonfiction film in general.