Fed Backstops Corner of Municipal Debt Markets Amid Calls for Support
By Jeanna SmialekWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve tiptoed into the market for municipal debt on Friday, a small move that economists, lawmakers and state treasurers say should be expanded as the coronavirus places huge financial pressure on local governments.The Fed will now let banks tap cheap loans by pledging short-term, highly rated municipal debt as collateral. That gives banks an incentive to buy local debt from money market mutual funds, creating demand for securities that had become hard to trade amid broader financial turmoil.The move could keep the mutual funds, popular investments among ordinary workers and companies, from crashing as investors cash out. The funds will now be able to sell off their municipal bond holdings to satisfy those redemptions. It could also help soothe the market for local bonds — used to finance everything from sewer projects to public transportation — where interest rates have surged as investors flee amid coronavirus economic fears.But it is a limited fix. The setup is probably too narrow to pave the way for state and local governments to issue bonds they might need to raise money going forward, economists said. Democratic lawmakers, a group of state treasurers, and interest groups have all urged the Fed to help municipalities more directly.“They are trying to fix a market liquidity issue,” Skanda Amarnath, research director at Employ America, a Fed-focused advocacy group, said of the central bank’s move. “You aren’t actually addressing the issue of getting the funds to the entities.”Friday’s announcement expanded an emergency lending program that the Fed had announced this week. The central bank said in a release late Wednesday that it would establish a so-called Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, backed by $10 billion from the Treasury Department. That program was intended to prevent runs on the funds, which many investors use as a short-term place to stash cash for a small return.The initial program looked much like a version the Fed used in 2008. The municipal debt addition will “enhance the liquidity and functioning of crucial state and municipal money markets,” the Fed said in its Friday statement.The central bank has been coming out with new programs daily to keep markets functioning. From Wall Street to Main Street, Americans are hoarding cash as the coronavirus upends businesses and threatens to plunge the nation into a deep recession.On Friday alone, it pumped up its efforts to keep dollar funding flowing overseas, increased its daily interventions in the market for short-term loans among banks and ramped up the pace of its mortgage-backed security purchasing schedule. All of those measures were squarely aimed at reducing pressures at the core of the financial system.Among other things, the credit crunch means there are relatively few buyers for municipal bonds. As a result, yields on those securities have skyrocketed.The timing couldn’t be worse for the municipal market to dry up. State and local governments have immense funding needs as they try to respond to the public health emergency posed by the virus, and tax revenues are expected to fall as workers lose their jobs.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Some lawmakers have been calling on the Fed to help. Representative Maxine Waters, the California Democrat who leads the House Financial Services Committee, has even proposed requiring the Fed “to support state, territory and local debt issuance in response to the coronavirus outbreak.” Senator Bob Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat, has proposed legislation that would let the Fed snap up local bonds of all maturities.The central bank could legally buy very short-term municipal debt outright, based on the powers it is granted under the Federal Reserve Act. But it has avoided that path, partly because of the political implications. Doing so would amount to government finance, something central banks globally avoid.“Munis are a whole different ballgame,” said Ernie Tedeschi, policy economist at Evercore ISI. “Now all of the sudden you run into problems about favoritism, regionalism and picking winners and losers.”A group of state treasurers sent the Fed’s chair, Jerome H. Powell, a letter on Friday requesting that it use that authority anyway. The Democratic Treasurers Association wrote that “states are taking unprecedented actions to expand health care capacity” and that “at the same time, tax revenues are reducing and financial market turbulence could freeze the municipal bond market.”