We All Need Small Businesses. Don’t Let Them Die.
The economy relies on thousands of local operations that need urgent help even more than big companies do.By Sendhil Mullainathan[Read our Coronavirus Relief Small Business F.A.Q.]By the time the coronavirus crisis is over, we might emerge from our homes only to find some of our favorite shops, gyms and restaurants permanently shuttered.It doesn’t need to be that way. While some of the harm has already been done, we can still prevent much of the long-lasting damage.Consider a hypothetical neighborhood restaurant that, until this crisis, was flourishing. Business was brisk, the employees worked well together, and customers enjoyed the feeling of being “regulars” at a place where everyone knew their name.Then the coronavirus hit. Suddenly business dried up. At first there was some takeout revenue, but even that disappeared.The bills keep coming. The restaurant owner no longer needs to buy meats, vegetables or liquor, but she is still on the hook for her biggest cost — rent. And she faces an ethical dilemma: Does she use her scant savings to continue to pay her workers?She has little money in cash reserve; operating margins are thin in a restaurant, and her savings had already been spent on expanding the cramped kitchen. What was a thriving enterprise before the pandemic will emerge — if it emerges at all — as a hobbled business, which may well fail shortly thereafter.The example may be hypothetical, but for hundreds of thousands of restaurants around the country the story is all too real. As Ben Leventhal, the chief executive of Resy, an online restaurant reservation platform, said, “We’re in uncharted territory,” and restaurants are struggling to survive.But there are tools that can be used to create better outcomes.The government can unilaterally freeze commercial rent and mortgage payments for small businesses. The policy can be targeted to businesses that use less than a certain square footage.This would shift the loss to the owners of those properties and mortgages, but many of them are large diversified companies with a balance sheet to absorb losses and the ability to renegotiate their contracts with their investors. Of course, some owners are themselves individuals or small businesses; for them, the waiving of their own mortgage payments would serve as relief.During the 2008 crisis, the government understood this principle well. It bailed out large financial firms for much the same reason: They were facing temporary shocks that, without intervention, would unnecessarily become permanent ones. Whatever else one may feel about those bailouts, that economic logic was sound. Those investments yielded healthy profits for the government.If it made sense to help American International Group then, surely it makes more sense for the local pizza shop. Beyond freezing rents and mortgage payments, the government can infuse cash into these businesses. That need not be a transfer — it can be an investment. While government agencies cannot easily take equity in small businesses, they can give credit. It makes sense to offer zero-interest loans with long maturities for the sole purpose of paying the staff.Governments around the world are beginning to act.President Emmanuel Macron has proposed suspending business rent payments in France. Proposals in Washington include loans to help cover lost revenue. As of this writing, a national rent moratorium has not been declared, but some policymakers recognize the need to do something for small businesses. Senator Marco Rubio, a Florida Republican, said on Wednesday, “There is broad general agreement that small businesses in this country will not be able to survive unless there is extraordinary assistance.”Individuals can take action, too. Small businesses are asking customers to buy gift cards for future use. Those who can afford this kind of investment will be doing some good.It is not only businesses that face economic distress. A sad fact of the economy in recent decades has been that far too many people have been relegated to economic positions that are even less secure than a small business.They get the worst end of entrepreneurship: exposure to bad circumstances with little benefit if things go swimmingly. All those people — hourly workers, gig economy workers, off-the-books cleaning and day care workers — now face a sudden drop in income.For these people, too, the temporary economic shock threatens to leave lasting damage. Without income flowing in, they are in deep trouble. Payday loans leave them trapped under a mountain of debt. Missed payments mean late fees and a permanent marring of credit scores. Missed rent can mean eviction.Wise policies can prevent this. A recent paper persuasively argued that the best way to prevent temporary shocks from becoming permanent problems is to eliminate short-term debt obligations to create some financial breathing room. For now, the government can institute a temporary forbearance on all major debt: mortgages, auto loans, student loans and big credit card payments. Such a policy is hardly onerous given that real interest rates (nominal rates minus inflation) are below zero. Such a policy would ensure that individuals did not emerge from this crisis burdened with debts and blemished credit.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Renters need help, too. Rent can be deferred without counting missed payments toward late fees or eviction triggers, with aid given to small landlords who need help. Brakes such as these need to be enacted — and enacted quickly — to keep the bad from turning into worse.I take the plight of small-business people personally. Perhaps you do, too.My mom ran a small video store in Los Angeles for over 20 years. She survived a major economic recession, two riots that rumbled past her window and even the opening of a Blockbuster nearby.Eventually, though, her business succumbed to the changing times. The customers moved on. And my mother, having had a good run, was about ready to let go anyway. She had time to make a choice and move on herself.But that’s not the case for the hundreds of thousands of businesses that were flourishing just two weeks ago. Their customers want those businesses to continue. Their owners were not ready to move on. Their employees wanted to work.When my mother closed the doors for the last time, it was hard and there was sadness. But it was the sadness of a good run that, like all things, must end.The businesses affected by the coronavirus face a different kind of sadness: the anguish of an unexpected disaster when everything was going well. That is a tragic end we must act now to prevent.