Stephen Colbert Makes a Surprise Return to Late Night
By John KoblinLate night did not stay dark long.Days after announcing that his show would be off the air for several weeks, the host of CBS’s “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert” made a surprise appearance on Monday, delivering a 10-minute monologue from his bathtub.“Welcome to my bathroom. I’m your host, Stephen Colbert,” he said at 11:35 p.m. “You’re watching a very special social distancing edition of ‘The Late Show.’”Surrounded by bubbles, Mr. Colbert was dressed in a dark suit, sporting facial scruff and wearing AirPods. A toilet was visible in the background.Like his fellow late night hosts — a group that includes NBC’s Jimmy Fallon, TBS’s Samantha Bee, HBO’s John Oliver and Comedy Central’s Trevor Noah — Mr. Colbert said last week that his show would suspend production until at least March 30 to guard against the spread of the coronavirus.“I wish I could stay onstage to share this uncertain moment with you, but I don’t do this show alone, and I have to do what’s best for my staff,” Mr. Colbert said on Thursday. “Hope to be back soon.”He was.From his bubble bath on Monday, Mr. Colbert brandished a container of Head & Shoulders shampoo and a slice of a pear and almond cream tart he had made. He also grabbed a can of Goya beans that he said he had been hoarding.“There’s literally hundreds of beans in this can,” he said. “One of them has to be magical. That’s just math.”The monologue had the rapid-fire cadences of the lines he usually delivers from the stage of the Ed Sullivan Theater in Manhattan. It included video clips of President Trump’s Monday news conference, with commentary. The host also mocked Mayor Bill de Blasio’s Monday visit to a Y.M.C.A. gym, which had been the subject of much ridicule on social media.“Come on, Mr. Mayor. Don’t you know that during an epidemic, it’s fun to stay at your h-o-m-e,” he said, to the tune of the vintage Village People hit “Y.M.C.A.” “’Cause if you don’t, we’ll be d-e-a-d.”After the monologue, Mr. Colbert turned to a piece taped last week featuring a “Late Show” producer and his mother learning about coronavirus. The rest of the show comprised segments from a February episode.When the late-night shows went on hiatus, some observers lamented that the hosts would not be around to add comfort, humor and a skeptical voice to the national discourse as they had during earlier times of crisis.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.David Letterman’s return to CBS six days after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in 2001 was a landmark in the genre’s history. Mr. Letterman — along with Mr. Fallon on NBC — also broadcast episodes without a studio audience in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy. Veteran late-night producers have also noted that moments of crisis give hosts a chance to break the rigid formats of their nightly shows.Mr. Colbert, who has the most-watched show in late night, did not have any competition on Monday. ABC showed a repeat of “Jimmy Kimmel Live!,” a night before “Nightline” temporarily takes over the 11:35 slot. New York’s NBC affiliate, WNBC, went with the local news until midnight, pushing a repeat of “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon” to early Tuesday.But Mr. Colbert’s bathtub monologue could signal weeks of do-it-yourself comedy from late-night entertainers.Two of his competitors were not entirely absent on Monday. Mr. Fallon posted a 21-second original song dedicated to hand washing to his Twitter account. And in a short video posted on YouTube, the TBS host Conan O’Brien sanitized a jigsaw puzzle by boiling its pieces while singing “Happy Birthday to You” in various accents.