Learning to Balance Profit With a Social Mission
Supported byBy Jessica SteinbergHONESDALE, Pa. — Ask Jeff Abella if he likes coffee, and he’ll say yes.Truth is, he can take it or leave it.It was Mr. Abella, however, who lugged pounds of coffee (and cacao) beans from Cameroon in his suitcase and roasted them in his kitchen toaster oven during a yearlong testing process to create premier coffee and signature chocolate bars.They are the core products of Moka Origins, the boutique roaster and retailer that Mr. Abella founded with Ishan Tigunait in a former dairy barn on the grounds of the Himalayan Institute, a yoga and meditation retreat in northeastern Pennsylvania.Mr. Abella, who is the chief executive, and his team of seven are bootstrapping this business for a greater purpose. The beans are part of the institute’s humanitarian efforts to help subsistence farmers find better ways to earn money and support themselves under better conditions.Moka Origins winnows about 1,000 pounds of coffee each month and prepares 2,000 to 4,000 bars of chocolate. Also, several Moka cafes are being opened across the United States.It’s not about the coffee or the chocolate, however. It’s about social entrepreneurship.More entrepreneurs are pursuing social or environmental goals, said Greg Brown, a professor of finance at the Kenan Institute of Private Enterprise at the University of North Carolina.Companies like Toms, Warby Parker and Uncommon Goods have pushed this concept into the mainstream by creating successful business models built around helping others. This trend has led to the rise of B Corporations, a certification for companies that meet high standards of social responsibility. The program started in 2007, and now more than 2,500 companies have been certified in more than 50 countries.Companies like Moka are a reflection of how consumers think as well, Professor Brown said. As people’s wealth increases, they think more about quality and less about quantity. They also consider the social context of what they’re buying.Olga Hawn, director of the Center for Sustainable Enterprise at the University of North Carolina, visits socially driven companies around the world with her students in the summer. They have met with artisanal chocolate makers in Ecuador, tea purveyors in the Amazon and ceramic artists in Peru.Some of the companies are huge successes, but others struggle mightily before closing. A cooperative of 300 ceramic artisans in Peru, for instance, failed because its products didn’t sell, said Dr. Hawn, an assistant professor of strategy and entrepreneurship.But others have found the right product. Pacari, an organic Ecuadorean chocolate company, was created by Santiago Peralta and Carla Barboto, who work with 350 small-scale farmers. Their chocolate is winning awards, and they are being approached by giant chocolate makers.“It’s that good story that makes you feel good about buying the product,” Dr. Hawn said. But entrepreneurs still need demand for the product to make a profit. “Even if you want to help, it has to help you, in some way,” she said.It’s difficult for most socially driven entrepreneurs to find a balance between promoting a product and helping those in need. They do not necessarily know if they have to have organic products or be registered as a fair-trade company. Those designations have value, but they take time to achieve.Entrepreneurs with a sustainability mission may be using beans from Africa or Ecuador and pouring money back into subsistence farms, Dr. Hawn said, but their product, branding and marketing look elite, which is part of their strategy to stand out.The successful companies often have Western founders, she said.“They can find resources more easily,” she said. “They get the awards from the United Nations. They know how to connect to Western markets as well; the Westerners tell the story better.”Mr. Abella said the hours that he had spent perfecting his products were secondary to his work in Cameroon with the farmers.He and his wife, Chelsea, spend half their time in Cameroon, helping farmers create sustainable businesses with environmentally friendly practices and finding methods to increase output. Mr. Abella wanted to find a market for those crops, rather than continuing to write grant proposals and create crowdfunding videos.“These are small family farms, and you’re trying to do organic and fair trade, but their organizational structure is very weak,” Mr. Abella said. “There’s no drinking water there, no paved roads and very little formal education.”He took his products back to Cameroon to show the farmers what was being made from the fruit that grew on their trees. They were stunned, he said, having never tasted coffee or chocolate before.“It was such a realization that the farmer was growing this on their trees, we’re spending a ton of money on a latte, and there’s this whole imbalance in between,” Mr. Abella said.The biggest bottleneck for farmers in developing countries is not production but not knowing how to market what they have grown, said Purvi Mehta, who heads the Asia agriculture department for the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.“People do know how to grow, but farmers remain poor because of lack of market,” said Ms. Mehta, who is based in New Delhi. A project like Moka Origins is niche, she said, but it has given a corner of Africa access to the market in the United States.Some of Moka Origin’s first customers were the summer camps dotting the hills and lakes of the Poconos region.“We love knowing that by drinking Moka coffee, we plant trees,” said Benjy Goldberg, who directs retreats during the off season at Camp Ramah in the Poconos, which set up Moka stations for staff last summer and offers the chocolate bars to guests.“We always try to buy local,” he added, “and when we met Moka and learned about how they incorporate social responsibility and sustainability, it was an easy choice for us as a Jewish educational camp.”Socially driven companies are an increasingly middle-class concept, Professor Brown said. Consumers will often choose the more expensive chocolate bar from a company whose profits benefit someone in need.“People are looking for an emotional connection to something,” he said.Mr. Abella found through a lot of research that the beans he was bringing back from Cameroon could be made into premium coffee. Around the same time, he also began working on a small batch of chocolate bars, buying cocoa beans from farmers and roasting them to make 100 bars each week.He spent all of 2016 logging 20-hour days, restoring the 100-year-old dairy barn and learning about certifications, packaging and producing both coffee and chocolate. His wife practiced the packaging for the Moka bars by cutting brown butcher paper into different shapes in their kitchen.“We had to figure it out ourselves, whether it was roasting or business strategy,” he said.He found that one of the biggest challenges in starting a small business was the necessity of doing it all without help.