Some Insurers Offer a Break for Drivers Stuck at Home
Allstate and American Family Insurance are pushing savings to customers automatically. Many others have not. We asked.By Ron LieberThe best kind of financial help is the kind that you don’t have to ask for.On Monday, Allstate and American Family Insurance said they would give their personal auto insurance customers a break, since most of them aren’t driving as much as they did a month or two ago.The savings don’t amount to a lot. Allstate will give most customers 15 percent of their monthly premium back in April and May, via a credit to their bank account, credit card or Allstate account. American Family will send auto insurance customers $50 for each vehicle on their policies.But the nature of the action is exemplary — and rare — given the context of a pandemic. People are sick, and many more are struggling. Nobody wants to have to think to call their auto insurer, let alone wait out the call-center deluge afflicting most financial services companies.Auto insurance companies are in an advantageous position in the quest to eke out a public relations win in these grim times. If people drive less, they crash less. Fewer crashes mean fewer claims. And fewer claims means more premium money sitting around on an insurer’s books. (Regulators in all the states where Allstate and American Family do business generally have to approve their plans to return customers’ cash, but they expect to start sending their refunds soon.)“We know there’s been a significant reduction in miles driven and claims filed for personal vehicles since the pandemic began limiting people’s activity,” American Family wrote in an F.A.Q. on the repayments. “We are not seeing similar claim trends in our other lines of insurance, such as homeowners where filed claims are increasing, likely from people staying home more, resulting in more accidents.”(Be careful with those fireplaces, please.)Allstate and American Family’s relative largess does raise a question though: Just how good have the stay-at-home orders been for auto insurers’ bottom lines?Allstate’s chief executive, Thomas J. Wilson, said the company was acting on relatively little information right now. But what it has gathered was eye-opening. “After one week’s worth of data came in, we knew this was significant,” he told me. “And it was less than two weeks from when we first saw the data to when we made this announcement.”Mr. Wilson said that driving to work was usually about one-third of people’s total miles on the road. But there are many unknowns insurers are still facing as a result of the stay-in-place orders, he said.The people who are still driving are driving faster, based on Allstate’s data. Will they crash more and do more damage when they do have a wreck? How long will the pandemic last? When it ends, will everyone still want to — and get to — work from home twice a week?Mr. Wilson said he would not know how profitable Allstate’s auto insurance operation would be without answering all those questions and more.American Family threw up its hands in similar confusion. “We’re returning to our customers estimated savings based on our best determination of what we know now,” a company spokesman, Ken Muth, said in an email. “We’ll continue to focus on aligning what we charge in premium to the expected costs associated with providing the insurance coverage, which is primarily paying out claims.”Doug Heller, an insurance expert with the Consumer of Federation of America, saw all of this coming a few weeks ago. The organization published a letter asking insurance companies to adjust their premiums in anticipation of a likely fall in claims. And his colleague Micah Hauptman has urged customers to call their insurers and ask for a better deal.Mr. Heller said in an interview that he was surprised at the two insurance companies’ decisions, since there hadn’t been much pressure on them. He said that probably would have changed, though, because state insurance regulators usually keep an eye out for excessive rates.“They’re collecting all this premium and aren’t seeing accidents or claims, so they have a choice,” Mr. Heller said. “They either start giving back money or have to explain their coronavirus windfall at some point.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.On Monday, I made like a regulator and went to nine other auto insurance companies and asked them whether they intended to match Allstate and American Family.So far, nobody is, but a couple sound close. A Progressive spokesman said that the company was “exploring how to best return some premium to customers” and that it expected to have those plans in place “soon.” And State Farm said its officials were “closely monitoring our automobile insurance loss trends and are considering how best to take this into account and return value to our auto insurance policyholders. We expect a decision in this regard by the end of the week.” USAA said: “We are exploring options to continue serving our members well during this difficult time. We’ll share more in the coming days.”Others were vague. A Liberty Mutual spokesman said the company was “continually evaluating ways that we can support our customers.” And from Nationwide: “We continue to evaluate all of our options.” Travelers said: “We are working with our customers and their agents to address their changing circumstances and continue to consider a number of programs to support them further in this rapidly evolving situation.”Others did not immediately answer my questions on Monday: Farmers, Geico and Chubb.