As the Coronavirus Damage Spreads, Talk Turns to Bailouts
 The Bank of England announced an emergency rate cut this morning, and the European Central Bank is expected to unveil new stimulus tomorrow. Later today, Wall Street bank chiefs will meet with the White House to discuss the fallout from the coronavirus and what they can do about it. (Want this in your inbox each morning? Sign up here.)We’ll be hearing a lot about the idea of plowing taxpayer money into the U.S. economy as the damage — human and financial — from the coronavirus outbreak leads to a conversation about government bailouts, Andrew writes in his latest column.Instead of having that conversation after the fact, let’s have it now. In the fall of 2008 — a presidential election year — the U.S. government bailed out the banks and automakers. The recriminations came as quickly as the money: over the terms, the risk, the recipients and the nature of “corporate socialism.”Who gets bailed out this time around?• Airlines are an obvious candidate, but Steven Rattner, who oversaw the auto bailout during the Obama administration, tells Andrew that enough private capital is still available to them. The airlines themselves also say they’re not asking for help (more on that below).• Shale companies are hurting from the plunge in the oil prices, but federal aid for the sector would be highly controversial.• Cruise ships are suffering. But is that industry crucial to the U.S. economy?• Hotels, restaurants and other hospitality firms could run into cash-flow issues, but where do you draw the line?Speed is of the essence, says Hank Paulson, who oversaw the 2008 bank bailouts as Treasury secretary under President George W. Bush. That means that using bailouts as policy tools — forcing changes to how airlines are run in return for loans, for example — may not be the best idea.• “We shouldn’t try to achieve every objective that might be imagined,” Mr. Rattner says. The goal, simply, should be to “get these companies back on their feet in a commercial way.”What’s politically possible? If the 2008 crisis is any indicator, bailouts and other emergency stimulus plans are a political morass with lasting effects. In this political environment, it’s hard to believe there won’t be a bitter fight.• A broad-based extension of unemployment insurance is probably the most politically palatable option. Relaxing work requirements for these benefits would also help.• President Trump has floated a payroll tax cut, but as Ben Casselman of the NYT notes, gradual tax cuts are less effective at stimulating the economy than larger lump-sum payments are.• Other ideas include using federal aid to cover states’ Medicaid costs and underwriting small business loans.In other coronavirus news …• The U.S. income tax deadline could be delayed. (NYT)• Mark Zuckerberg’s and Bill Gates’ foundations are paying for additional coronavirus testing equipment in San Francisco and Seattle. (Recode)• Italy has suspended mortgage payments and other household bills. (FT)• Coachella, the world’s highest-grossing music festival, is being postponed until October. (WSJ)• All of Google’s workers in North America are being asked to work from home. (Bloomberg)C.E.O.s from the major carriers said yesterday at an investor conference — held online by JPMorgan Chase — that they were prepared to ride out the turbulence created by the coronavirus outbreak even as they announced deep cuts to flights, spending, hiring and their own salaries, the NYT’s Niraj Chokshi reports.The scale of the downturn was laid bare by United’s president, Scott Kirby: In the past few days, the airline has experienced a total collapse in bookings to Asia and Europe. Domestically, net bookings were down about 70 percent.Conserving cash is crucial, and the airline chiefs all said that they had enough on hand. It’s worth noting that in recent years the companies have spent billions buying back their own shares.American, Delta, United and Southwest spent a collective $6.8 billion on share repurchases last year, up from $5.7 billion in 2018. (The high was $11.5 billion in 2016.)New Enterprise Associates is known for raising some of Silicon Valley’s biggest venture capital funds. We can reveal that the firm has closed its 17th fund at $3.6 billion, its biggest yet.“Our founders have always believed in scale,” Scott Sandell, its managing general partner, told Michael in an interview. That drove the firm to raise what’s now Silicon Valley’s second-biggest venture fund, after Sequoia’s colossal $8 billion fund, going from start to close in about 12 months.The fund will be focused on N.E.A.’s traditional areas of interest, including start-ups in the health care technology, fintech and enterprise sectors. It plans to invest largely in early-stage businesses, where it tends to get its biggest returns, though Tony Florence, a general partner, added that it had the firepower to “double down” on promising older portfolio companies that need capital to grow. Neither partner professed worry about finding enough potential investments, a problem that has hamstrung Sequoia.The firm isn’t too worried about the coronavirus … but is telling start-ups to look after employees and make sure the companies have enough cash to ride out a tough fund-raising environment. “When you don’t know where your money is coming from, you’d better be careful with the money you have,” Mr. Sandell said.It had already been telling its start-ups to be more parsimonious, avoiding the sort of free-spending that led to WeWork’s meteoric rise and fall. Or, as Mr. Sandell put it, avoid taking $300 million from SoftBank’s Vision Fund, increase market share by a few percentage points and “become profitable when your grandkids grow up.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Last year, Occidental was riding high after striking a deal to buy the fellow oil producer Anadarko for $38 billion, beating out Chevron and fending off Carl Icahn. This year, that all came crashing down.Oxy will slash its dividend 86 percent, to 11 cents. (It’s one of the biggest such cuts in years.) The company also plans to cut capital expenditures this year to as little as $3.5 billion, down from a maximum planned spend of $5.4 billion.Its market value has tumbled to $12.8 billion, well below the $42 billion when it closed the Anadarko deal in August. And the value of Oxy’s debt also sank: A long-term bond it issued last year now trades at 69 cents on the dollar.The culprit: oil prices. Oxy is just one of many American shale producers that have been hit hard by a steep drop in the price of crude as the coronavirus outbreak and a price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia take their toll. Aramco, the giant Saudi oil producer, said this morning that it planned to produce an additional one million barrels per day, an effort aimed in part at squeezing U.S. shale rivals.The Anadarko deal may be the worst-timed takeover since Bayer’s $63 billion acquisition of Monsanto in 2018, which saddled it with huge legal costs over lawsuits related to the weedkiller Roundup.Deals• The Goldman Sachs C.F.O., Stephen Scherr, said the bank was “very open” to making acquisitions — though don’t expect any E-Trade-size deals anytime soon. (Reuters)• PepsiCo is reportedly near a deal to buy Rockstar Energy Beverages for about $3.8 billion. (WSJ)Politics and policy• Joe Biden scored big victories in last night’s Democratic presidential primaries. And Andrew Yang, a former rival, endorsed him, saying: “The math says Joe is our prohibitive nominee.” (NYT, Politico)• Wells Fargo’s new C.E.O., Charlie Scharf, pledged to House lawmakers that he would overhaul the bank’s “broken” culture. (NYT)Tech• The stock-trading app Robinhood maxed out its credit line last month during the stock market volatility. (Bloomberg)• Microsoft organized 35 countries to help take down one of the world’s biggest botnets. (NYT)Best of the rest• How Outdoor Voices, the popular athletic wear start-up, imploded. (NYT)• Why working from home isn’t always that great, aside from containing the spread of disease. (NYT)