E. Jean Carroll Says Elle Magazine Fired Her After Trump Rape Accusation
By Neil Vigdor and Ed ShanahanE. Jean Carroll, the longtime Elle magazine advice columnist who last year accused Donald J. Trump of raping her before he was elected president, said on Tuesday that she was fired by the publication because of Mr. Trump’s repeated insults against her.Ms. Carroll, the author of the “Ask E. Jean” column, announced her departure from the magazine on Twitter and blamed it on Mr. Trump, who she said had sexually assaulted her in a dressing room at an upscale New York department store more than 20 years ago.Mr. Trump has repeatedly denied Ms. Carroll’s accusation.“Because Trump ridiculed my reputation, laughed at my looks, & dragged me through the mud, after 26 years, ELLE fired me,” Ms. Carroll wrote on Twitter. “I don’t blame Elle. It was the great honor of my life writing ‘Ask E. Jean.’”Ms. Carroll sued Mr. Trump for defamation in New York State Court in November, saying that Mr. Trump had damaged her reputation and her career when he denied her allegation last June and called her a liar.In a court filing in that lawsuit on Tuesday, Ms. Carroll’s lawyer, Roberta Kaplan, included an email dated Dec. 11 to Ms. Carroll from Erin Hobday, the executive managing editor of Elle. In the email, Ms. Hobday confirmed they were terminating Ms. Carroll and would pay her for the remaining five columns in her contract.“We and your readers so appreciate your many years of work for the magazine, and the wonderful columns you contributed to our publication,” Ms. Hobday wrote, adding: “We will miss you tremendously.”The last “Ask E. Jean” column on Elle magazine’s website is dated Nov. 22.Hearst, which publishes Elle, did not respond to a request for comment. A lawyer for Mr. Trump also did not respond to a request.Ms. Carroll, 76, said Mr. Trump threw her up against a wall and forced himself on her in a fitting room at Bergdorf Goodman in Manhattan in the mid-1990s.The episode took place in late 1995 or early 1996, according to Ms. Carroll, who has said that Mr. Trump asked her to model lingerie that he was considering buying. At the time, Mr. Trump was married to his second wife, Marla Maples.Ms. Carroll’s announcement on Twitter that she was no longer working for Elle came the same day that her lawyer moved to block a request by Mr. Trump that her suit be delayed until a second, similar suit is resolved — something that may not happen until after the presidential election in November.Ms. Kaplan said the president was using questionable tactics to dodge her requests for discovery and a DNA sample that she says may help her case.“Nothing in Trump’s extensive history of personal litigation during his presidency supports his bald assertion that discovery into whether he lied about raping Carroll will harm the national interest,” Ms. Kaplan said in a filing in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.Mr. Trump’s lawyers have argued that Ms. Carroll’s suit should be postponed until New York’s highest court, the Court of Appeals, rules on a question at issue in the second suit: whether a sitting president can be sued.Ms. Carroll first discussed the sexual assault allegation in an excerpt from her 2019 book, “What Do We Need Men For?,” that was published in New York magazine. She said in an interview on CNN that Mr. Trump threw her up against a wall so hard that “I hit my head really hard — boom.” She said that she tried to fight back against Mr. Trump’s violent advances.At the time Ms. Carroll’s account was published, Mr. Trump asserted during an interview with The Hill, a Capitol Hill news outlet, that he would not have assaulted her because “she’s not my type.”“I’ll say it with great respect,” Mr. Trump said. “No. 1, she’s not my type. No. 2, it never happened. It never happened, OK?”Mr. Trump insisted that he never met Ms. Carroll, but the two were photographed together at a party in 1987 with Ms. Carroll’s former husband, John Johnson. Mr. Trump later said that the image was misleading. He labeled Ms. Carroll as a liar who was trying to sell a book.“Standing with my coat on in a line?” Mr. Trump said in June. “Give me a break — with my back to the camera? I have no idea who she is.”New York’s Appellate Division ruled last year that the second defamation suit against Mr. Trump, which was filed by Summer Zervos, a former contestant on Mr. Trump’s television show, “The Apprentice,” could proceed.The Appellate Division later said that the Court of Appeals should determine whether Mr. Trump was entitled to the immunity he has asserted.Like Ms. Carroll, Ms. Zervos has accused Mr. Trump of assaulting her before he became president, and of defaming her by branding her a liar.If Mr. Trump fails in his effort to suspend Ms. Carroll’s suit until Ms. Zervos’s suit is resolved, he may be required to submit a DNA sample, according to court filings.In a letter to Mr. Trump’s lawyers last month, Ms. Carroll said that she believed Mr. Trump’s DNA could match genetic material found on the dress that she says she was wearing the day of the alleged attack and has kept since then.Updated May 25, 2020