Democrats Say JPMorgan’s Response to Racism Questions Was Lacking
By Emily FlitterJPMorgan Chase disclosed this week that less than 5 percent of its nearly 3,700 financial advisers are black and said it still had work to do to improve diversity in its ranks. But some Democratic lawmakers want to know more.Congressional Democrats in both chambers were critical of the bank on Thursday for its response to questions they raised in response to a New York Times report about racism at some of the bank’s branches in Arizona.A financial adviser there recorded his boss disparaging a black customer as being “from Section 8,” a reference to public housing, and saying she did not deserve to be in the bank’s program for elite customers. Another black customer, the former National Football League player Jimmy Kennedy, struggled for months to get access to a package of perks for wealthy clients — a delay that an employee told him was connected to his race.Last month, five Democratic senators and two Democratic congressmen sent letters to JPMorgan’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, seeking a detailed explanation of those episodes and an accounting of the bank’s plans to address black employees’ discrimination complaints.The congressmen, Emanuel Cleaver II of Missouri and Al Green of Texas, requested a demographic breakdown of the bankers JPMorgan employs in different parts of the country. The senators, including Sherrod Brown of Ohio, asked for a list of cases in which regulators have penalized the bank for violating fair lending and employment laws over the past decade.The bank responded this week, but it did not provide specific answers to those questions.“We do not want this to happen again,” the bank wrote, adding that it was clear that Mr. Kennedy had “had a terrible customer experience with us.”In an email the lawmakers intend to send to Mr. Dimon on Friday, Mr. Cleaver and Mr. Green will say the bank’s response was inadequate, according to two people familiar with the email. The lawmakers, who are both members of the House Financial Services Committee, will offer JPMorgan a second chance to respond to their questions by Monday, according to the people, who described the email on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.Mr. Brown said in a statement that he was disappointed that Mr. Dimon had not responded personally to a letter that had been addressed to him. The letter Mr. Brown received from the bank on Wednesday was signed by JPMorgan’s co-president, Gordon Smith, and the chief executive of its consumer banking business, Thasunda Duckett.“I would have expected a direct response from the C.E.O. to a letter raising such important concerns about systemic racism at JPMorgan,” Mr. Brown said.