Flybe, a British Regional Airline, Stops Flying
By Iliana Magra and Carlos TejadaFlybe, an ailing regional airline in Britain that was praised for flying into underserved corners of the country, ceased operations on Thursday after financial strains caused by coronavirus.In a notice on its website dated Thursday, Flybe said that all its flights had been grounded and that it would not be able to make other arrangements for its passengers. It said the company had been placed in administration, and it directed questions to Ernst & Young, the auditing firm.The company reportedly had about 2,000 employees. Efforts at a government bailout, announced this year, never got final approval.“This is a sad day for U.K. aviation, and we know that Flybe’s decision to stop trading will be very distressing for all of its employees and customers,” said Richard Moriarty, chief executive of Britain’s Civil Aviation Authority, in a separate statement from the British regulator.Officials expressed hope that other airlines would pick up some of Flybe’s service. On Thursday afternoon, Loganair, a Glasgow-based regional airline, announced that it would take up 16 of Flybe’s routes, and offered to hire some of its pilots, cabin crew and office support crew.The coronavirus outbreak, which has sickened more than 95,700 people in at least 81 countries, has hit the travel industry hard, leading airlines big and small to cut flights as tourists stay home.For Flybe, which had been on financial life support for months, an increase in bookings was necessary for its survival, Graham Braithwaite, director of transport systems at Cranfield University, said by phone on Thursday.“It was already in trouble, and the coronavirus accelerated the inevitable,” just as bookings were expected to pick up ahead of spring and summer holidays, Mr. Braithwaite said.As a low-cost regional airline, Flybe was “operating in a very competitive and price sensitive market, and it was vulnerable to rising costs,” said Lucy Budd, professor of Air Transport Management at De Montfort University, in an email on Thursday.Mr. Braithwaite added: “Flybe ran out of options and ran out time.” He warned that Flybe might have been the first airline whose collapse was sped up by the virus, but that it wouldn’t be the last.The carrier’s financial problems go back at least to October 2018, when it issued a profit warning based on projections of weaker demand. Its shares fell by about a third, as analysts pointed to increasing competition with budget carriers like Ryanair and uncertainty leading up to Britain’s departure from the European Union. Brexit was widely considered to be a factor in last year’s collapse of Thomas Cook, the British travel agency.Flybe’s prospects briefly brightened a year ago when it was bought for 2.2 million pounds ($2.8 million) by Richard Branson’s carrier, Virgin Atlantic, and its partners, Stobart Group and Cyrus Capital.But financial problems continued, and the British government announced this year that it was exploring options that could lead to its recovery, including adjustments to the Air Passenger Duty, a tax paid by plane operators.In January, Sajid Javid, then chancellor of the Exchequer, said the government would take new measures to support connectivity across Britain.“I welcome Flybe’s confirmation that they will continue to operate as normal, safeguarding jobs in U.K. and ensuring flights continue to serve communities across the whole of the U.K.,” he said in a statement at the time.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.But the measures received a lukewarm response from Prime Minister Boris Johnson.“It’s not for government to step in and save companies that simply run into trouble,” he told the BBC in January, “but be in no doubt that we see the importance of Flybe in delivering connectivity across the whole United Kingdom.”In February Mr. Javid quit as chancellor, in a reshuffling of Mr. Johnson’s government. The bailout effort ultimately failed, according to The Financial Times, after the government rejected the idea of a £100 million loan.Flybe, which was based in Exeter, in southwestern England, dominated many smaller airports. For example, it provided 95 percent of all flights at Southampton Airport, along Britain’s southern coast.Another major service hub was Belfast, in Northern Ireland.“The airline was a significant economic driver for the region, carrying 1.6 million passengers to and from Belfast in 2019,” Brian Ambrose, chief executive of Belfast City Airport, said in a statement on Thursday.Questions regarding regional connectivity and the impact on the local work force will need to be answered by the government in the coming days, but for Flybe staff who found themselves unemployed overnight, one question lingered: What now?“It’s really sad,” Katherine Densham, one employee, told Sky News amid tears on Thursday.