Guerrilla Golfers Sneak Onto Greens Closed by Pandemic
By David SegalDELRAY BEACH, Fla. — The 18 holes of the Boca Delray Golf and Country Club have been closed since late March, when administrators of Palm Beach County, Fla., decided to shutter every business and activity deemed nonessential.Apparently, some members didn’t get, or didn’t like, the message.“People have called to let us know that they’ve seen players on the course,” said Michelle LaDouceur, the club’s property manager. “We don’t have 24-hour staff here, and no security cameras, either. So if people are out there playing, we have no way of knowing about it and no way of policing it.”Add this to the list of cultural phenomena produced by the pandemic: renegade golfers. With about half the nation’s courses closed by state or local leaders, and with the weather turning to spring, a few million hard-core golf fans are struggling to restrain themselves. Many are failing.“My wife’s not thrilled that I’m out here,” said Ira Lipshutz, 74, who was chipping balls with a friend at the Westchester Country Club in Boynton Beach, Fla., on Wednesday. “She’s much more cautious than I am.”Nearby, Diane Koltun got out of a Lexus and headed to the greens with two golf clubs pinned under an arm.“I think this is fine,” she said, blocking the sun with her free hand. “We’re walking around, getting some fresh air.”Westchester, a public course, appeared to lack any kind of “Get Lost” signs or locked gates. But course managers across the country have put up yellow caution tape, posted “No Trespassing” warnings and removed pins, rakes and tee markers.It doesn’t matter. A group of golfers in York, Pa., ignored the tape and played until police arrived and shooed them away. Officers have also been dispatched to greens in Brockton, Mass. In New York City, police have escorted more than 300 golfers off public courses in Staten Island, Brooklyn and Queens. Five players have been issued $50 summonses for trespassing.“We all have to make sacrifices for the greater good health of our nation,” said Crystal Howard, a spokeswoman for New York City Parks. “That includes shutting down courses for the time being.”The golf pause has been a source of special irritation in the Sunshine State, a haven for retirees who migrated for low taxes, great weather and golf. Two out of three will not suffice.The sport is actually allowed under Gov. Ron DeSantis’s original “stay-at-home” order, but leaders in Palm Beach, Miami-Dade and Broward Counties superseded that mandate with their own. (That is because the counties are in Southeast Florida, home to roughly 55 percent of the state’s Covid-19 cases, according to the governor’s office.) The state has since become a land of golf haves and have-nots.For a while, the have-nots searched online for options and traveled to open greens. Gradually, that option disappeared. Most recently, Martin County, a 45-minute drive from West Palm Beach, issued rules that restrict play on its courses to members and residents. No outsiders allowed, even family.Golf lovers in the three golfless counties have since been agitating on the sport’s behalf. In Palm Beach County, the most furious have circulated the mobile phone number of Dave Kerner, the county mayor, who announced the shutdown, and pelted him with calls.“There is also a small contingent that has called or texted my parents and said, ‘Tell your son to open the golf courses,’” Mr. Kerner said in a phone interview. (That’s the expletive-free version of the message.) “I understand the anger. I am a 36-year-old mayor that no one has ever heard of and I was the one to close golf in the golf capital of the universe.”Those taking a more civil approach include Scott Eckert, a golfer in Boca Raton, who drafted an online petition urging Mr. Kerner and other Palm Beach County administrators to change their minds. It now has more than 8,000 signatures.“To me, it’s pretty questionable that they can continue to keep courses closed,” Mr. Eckert said in an interview on Sunday. “There is a Bill of Rights, and our civil liberties have been trashed.”One of the signatories to the petition is Jack Doyle, a former Wall Street executive who has built a 1,000-square-foot practice green in his front yard, complete with sand traps.“I’m able to get a little bit of a golf fix in every day,” he said by phone from his home in Manalapan, a town in Palm Beach County.Like many other golf fans, Mr. Doyle thinks it was shortsighted of government officials to prohibit an activity that is not just beloved but safe, when done with proper care.“You’re outside, in the sunlight, in fresh air. You can keep a social distance from everyone while still being able to get some exercise and maintain relationships,” he said. “To have that taken away is a damn shame.”Idled golfers may seem low on any list of tribulations caused by Covid-19. But owners and managers of both public and private courses are suffering, too. Many were coping with falling revenue before this crisis. The number of golfers in the United States peaked in 2003, with 30 million players, according to the National Golf Foundation, and is now about 24 million. Thanks to dwindling demand, and overbuilding during the housing boom, the number of golf courses that close each year (about 150) now far surpasses new openings (about 20).Golf courses aren’t expecting an outpouring of sympathy. The public perception of the industry is reflected in its inclusion on what is informally known as the Internal Revenue Service “sin list,” a group of enterprises that are blocked from all sorts of government initiatives, including disaster relief. Others on the list include massage parlors, racetracks and hot tub facilities.So far, there’s been no reference to the sin list in any of the coronavirus programs passed in Washington. But Jay Karen, the chief executive of the National Golf Course Owners Association, says he and his colleagues are on alert.“There’s a bias against the game and the business of golf, and it’s patently unfair,” said Mr. Karen. “The feeling is that golf courses are owned by a bunch of rich guys, which is a very old narrative that no longer holds true.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Nationally, 80 percent of golf is played on what are known as public courses, Mr. Karen added. In terms of revenue and payroll, these are businesses roughly the size of a typical restaurant. Unlike most restaurants, though, golf courses are outdoors. They would have a reasonable chance at survival, supporters say, if they were allowed to stay open.“It’s a game that is played in what is essentially a 200-acre park, with a maximum of 70 people in the park at a time,” said Steve Skinner, the chief executive of KemperSports, which manages 130 golf courses. “That’s more than two acres per person.”To Peter Weiss, the mayor of Oceanside, Calif., that seems like ample space. He had hoped all courses in the city would stay open, despite Gov. Gavin Newsom’s stay-at-home order. But in late March, the last holdouts attracted enough players, and media attention, that health officials ordered them closed the next day. As a courtesy, the mayor called to give the courses a heads up — and to see if they had any tee times for a final round.One did. “It was one of my better golf experiences, honestly,” Mr. Weiss said. “And it didn’t feel crowded. There’s more people at a Trader Joe’s.”Mr. Weiss has now joined the great mass of sidelined golfers. These are people dealing with something akin to withdrawal, says Alan Shapiro, a psychologist and the author of “Golf’s Mental Hazards.” In a typical round, he says, even good golfers hit just a handful of superb shots, and they’re rare and exhilarating enough to yield a mood-altering rush. It’s difficult to know when that rush will occur, which means golf offers what’s known as “intermittent reinforcement,” a jolt of joy the timing of which can’t be predicted.“That moment of glory is something that golfers jones for, like gamblers at a slot machine,” said Dr. Shapiro. “Now what are you supposed to do? Read a book? Spend time with the family? Those things are nice, but they’re not like nailing a 7-iron right at the flag stick.”Some golfers were unwilling to surrender the game’s mental buzz without a fight. When Palm Beach County issued its shutdown order, a few private clubs decided that the rule did not apply to them.“We rectified the language of the order so that it was clear that it applied to all courses,” Mr. Kerner said. To make sure the message got through, “There were two or three courses that the sheriff or one of his colleagues needed to visit and educate in a professional manner,” he said.Mr. Kerner said that he hoped to reopen golf courses late next week but admitted that the time frame was “aspirational.”Whenever the greens are again filled with people, don’t expect to find Mr. Lipshutz at the Westchester Country Club, or any other course, for that matter. The moment that the county decides it’s safe to golf is the moment he will stop golfing during the pandemic.