Wilbur Ross Says Coronavirus Could Bring Jobs Back to the U.S.
By Ana Swanson and Alan RappeportWASHINGTON — Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross predicted Thursday morning that a deadly virus originating in China would cause companies to reconsider their global supply chains and ultimately “help to accelerate” the return of jobs to the United States.In an interview on Fox Business, Mr. Ross said diseases like the Wuhan coronavirus, which has killed more than a hundred people and sickened thousands, were “another risk factor that people need to take into account” when considering where to locate operations.“Every American’s heart has to go out to the victims of the coronavirus, so I don’t want to talk about a victory lap over a very unfortunate, very malignant disease,” Mr. Ross said. “But the fact is, it does give businesses yet another thing to consider when they go through their review of their supply chain.”He cited the deadly SARS outbreak that paralyzed China 17 years ago, as well as the African swine fever that has decimated China’s pig farms.“So I think it will help to accelerate the return of jobs to North America,” Mr. Ross said of the coronavirus. “Some to U.S., probably some to Mexico as well.”The Trump administration has been waging a global trade war in an attempt to bring jobs back to the United States. That has included steep tariffs on imported goods, which President Trump has wielded as a cudgel to force companies to relocate manufacturing to the United States.Officials have said that the first-phase trade deal Mr. Trump signed with China this month would improve ties between the countries. But they also say that their tariffs — which remain in place on more than $360 billion of Chinese products — will cause American companies with Chinese operations to think about moving their supply chains back home.Some companies that can move operations out of China have been doing so, in part to avoid the tariffs and in part because of longer-run economic factors, like China’s rising wages. But economists say that few of these factories are moving back to the United States. Instead, competition for factory space in low-wage countries like Vietnam, Mexico and India to make clothes, toys and shoes has been fierce.And many companies say they are unable to move their supply chains, often because it is too expensive to shift or because China is the primary manufacturer of their materials. For instance, China remains the global hub of electronics manufacturing, and a huge consumer market in its own right.The Chinese government has placed entire cities under lockdown to stop the spread of the coronavirus, and encouraged companies to let their workers stay home.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The moves are expected to result in a major dent in the Chinese economy — and are likely spill over to slow global growth. Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, said on Wednesday that “there is likely to be some disruption to activity in China and perhaps globally.”The virus has already caused companies including Apple, Ford and Toyota to reroute supply chains and idle factories in China, while Ikea, Starbucks and other businesses have temporarily closed some Chinese stores. British Airways and Air Canada have suspended all flights to mainland China, while other major airlines have reduced the number of flights.Mr. Ross, a wealthy investor, has been criticized for making controversial or seemingly out-of-touch statements in televised interviews before. In May 2018, he held up a can of Campbell’s soup while arguing that the administration’s metal tariffs would have a minimal effect on consumers. In early 2019, he suggested that workers who had been sent home without pay during the government shutdown should take out personal loans.