Fed Unveils Emergency Lending Programs as Companies Struggle to Raise Cash
By Jeanna Smialek, Kate Kelly and Peter EavisWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve took a series of steps on Tuesday to prop up the American economy, saying first that it would begin buying up a type of debt that companies issue for short-term cash and then, later in the day, establishing a lending program meant to help the banks at the core of the financial system function smoothly.Both were efforts to keep credit flowing to businesses and households.Taking a page from its 2008 financial crisis playbook, the Fed said it would backstop the $1.13 trillion market for commercial paper, a key funding source used by companies to cover payroll and day-to-day operations. That market, used by firms like Pfizer, Royal Dominion and DuPont, has started to come under strain as businesses raced to fill up their coffers in the face of quarantines, shuttered shopping centers and empty restaurants.Not long after, the Fed said it would roll out a new Primary Dealers Credit Facility, which will allow banks that are key conduits between the Fed, Treasury Department and the broader financial system to get the short-term loans they need to buy and hold securities including corporate bonds.“The facility will allow primary dealers to support smooth market functioning and facilitate the availability of credit to businesses and households,” the Fed said of the new program.In backstopping the commercial paper market, the Fed is trying to protect the rest of the financial system and insulate the broader economy, where short-term pain could turn into long-term suffering if credit crunches prevent companies from obtaining the cash they need to function, forcing them to lay off workers, delay payments to vendors and shutter plants.The Fed program will use a special vehicle to buy unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible companies, according to a statement by the central bank. The Fed is not allowed to expose itself to substantial credit risk, so the Treasury Department will protect the Fed against $10 billion worth of losses through its Exchange Stabilization Fund.Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, speaking on Tuesday at a White House news conference on the virus, said the central bank would be able to buy about $1 trillion worth of commercial paper “as needed.”“We heard loud and clear there were liquidity issues,” Mr. Mnuchin said.In recent days, buyers of commercial paper disappeared, and the ones who stayed demanded much higher rates. The funding cost for Royal Caribbean Cruises, which has been hit hard by the coronavirus fallout, skyrocketed from a roughly 2 percent interest rate last Thursday to more than 4 percent on Monday, a day before the Fed’s funding facility was announced, according to market participants. The utility company Exelon has also had its financing costs rise by a similar degree, those people added.The Fed’s program should act like an escape valve, snapping up higher-rated notes to keep cash flowing, much as it did during the 2008 financial crisis, when credit markets largely froze. It will also buy lower-rated notes in a set of one-time purchases, offering relief for the most embattled commercial paper issues.In order to set up the program, the central bank needed to declare that the economy faces “unusual and exigent” circumstances, allowing it to use its special lending abilities under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act.The Fed’s move followed sweeping action it took on Sunday, when it slashed rates nearly to zero and announced a program to buy up government debt and mortgage-backed securities. Those purchases are also meant to ease strained markets, including that for Treasury securities — which had become hard to trade, a problem because they are in many ways the backbone of the financial system.The Fed has also sweetened the terms of its so-called discount window, which allows banks to tap short-term loans from the Fed. It has encouraged banks to begin using the program and the nation’s biggest banks said on Monday night they would use the program. Regulators have also been providing limited regulatory relief to banks to keep credit flowing.After the 2008 financial crisis, Washington forced big banks to hold on to trillions of dollars in assets that could easily be converted into cash. On Tuesday, regulators told the banks they could start to sell off some of those assets and encouraged them to use the cash to lend to struggling businesses.But investors were clamoring for more, especially as the commercial paper market seized up.It was “obviously a positive step, obviously necessary,” said Ernie Tedeschi, policy economist at Evercore ISI. “The only surprising thing is that it took them this long to do it.”The struggle to raise cash has threatened to set off a chain reaction. Many companies, including Boeing, Kraft Heinz, and Hilton Worldwide, are now drawing on lines of credit. Money market funds — a major buyer of commercial paper — have stopped buying to keep cash on hand in case their investors want to withdraw their money.“For the smallest and biggest investors, the playbook says build cash in an uncertain environment,” says Peter Crane, president of Crane Data, a company that tracks money market funds. “You stock up on that even before you get to the toilet paper.”On Monday, those seeking commercial paper funding were being offered new loans with terms as short as a single day — a sign that investors are simply not willing to tie their cash up as the coronavirus stokes uncertainty and arrests cash flow, said one large commercial paper dealer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss client matters.The cash clamor is in turn putting pressure on banks to keep their own money free to meet customer demand, potentially preventing them from serving as an intermediary in other crucial markets and hampering trading in everything from Treasurys to corporate debt.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The largest banks have agreed to make huge amounts of credit available to companies. These commitments are typically not reflected in loan totals but are tacked on to other disclosures — and can be enormous. With these loan commitments and other items, the balance sheets of the six biggest U.S. banks would have been a combined $2.8 trillion larger at the end of last year, according to regulatory filings.Executives at the banks say their institutions could handle big loan drawdowns. The companies receiving the loans would put it back in the banking system, and if they pay the cash out to employees and suppliers, they too would put it in bank accounts, said one senior bank executive who was not authorized to speak publicly. And if there were temporary problems, the banks could get the funding they need at the Fed’s discount window, this person added.The Fed’s many interventions — which also include daily efforts to keep overnight lending between banks and financial institutions functioning smoothly — seem to be helping. But some analysts and investors said that additional relief may still be needed.“It’s on the mend,” said Gennadiy Goldberg, a rates strategist at TD Securities, who said conditions in funding and Treasury debt markets were still choppy on Tuesday. “But it’s not healed yet.”And more problems could soon arise. If companies struggle to find buyers for their bonds at affordable interest rates in coming weeks, pressure may build on the Fed to buy corporate bonds — which it lacks the legal leeway to do alone, since it cannot take on much credit risk. The nearly $10 trillion corporate bond market dwarfs the $1 trillion commercial paper market.Economists said the fact that the new commercial paper program was backed by the Treasury funding source, unlike the 2008 version, opens up other possibilities, however. The Treasury’s Exchange Stabilization Fund still has about $80 billion that could be leveraged.Treasury could use it to back other Fed facilities “to provide broader support to the economy, particularly toward challenged small businesses,” Michael Feroli at J.P. Morgan wrote in a research note. The “important thing” is that it “expands the options available for the Fed to support the economy.”A Fed official sounded open to such an idea.“Possibly,” Patrick Harker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, said when asked about the chance of future Treasury-backed emergency programs. “Supports for small- and medium-sized business, that’s something we could think of doing.”While the Fed’s Board in Washington decides on such matters, it does so in consultation with regional leaders.