Europe’s Strong Labor Laws Aren’t a Guarantee for Lower-Wage Workers
By Jack Ewing and Geneva AbdulFRANKFURT — As the German airline Lufthansa struggles to stay in business, it’s no surprise that its employees are suffering, too. But as is the case at other struggling companies, some workers are suffering more than others.They are often the ones who earned the least to begin with.Faced with collapsing sales, Lufthansa agreed to take full advantage of a government subsidy program that, combined with money from the company, provides furloughed workers with 90 percent of their normal net pay. The subsidy alone would have provided them 60 to 67 percent.That was nice, except it did not apply to the crews for SunExpress, which is a joint venture between Lufthansa and Turkish Airways and offers budget flights to Mediterranean holiday spots.SunExpress employees, who already are paid less than Lufthansa workers, will receive a lesser deal while furloughed: 75 percent of their net pay, or 82 percent for those with children.About 27,000 Lufthansa cabin and ground personnel are covered by the agreement. SunExpress has about 1,200 employees in Germany, giving them far less political influence.Lufthansa is an example of how corporate cost-cutting in Europe is falling hardest on people at the low end of the pay scale, despite strong unions and strict labor laws.“The ones who were already weak, who already had worse working conditions, are now the ones that suffer,” said Mira Neumaier, head of the civil aviation team at the German service workers union known as Ver.di.Airlines, retailers and many other industries are in dire shape after lockdowns that brought much of the global economy to a standstill. They have to drastically cut costs. Lufthansa last week asked for government bailouts after passenger traffic dwindled to almost nothing and it lost more than a billion euros in the first quarter.Lufthansa’s agreements with workers are intended “to keep as many employees on board as possible,” Jörg Waber, a Lufthansa spokesman, said in an emailed statement.But Ms. Neumaier said the savings to the airline from treating some employees worse than others was out of proportion to the burden on individual workers. A SunExpress flight attendant typically earns less than 2,000 euros (or $2,200) a month before taxes, according to worker representatives.For some employees, she said, “it will really make a difference whether they can pay their rent or not.”At some companies, cost-cutting means targeting the workers who can be fired with the least fuss, or who have the least clout in the labor market.WrenKitchens, which describes itself as Britain’s largest kitchen retailer, fired hundreds of employees in March, including many trainees and recent hires, saying their performance was not up to par. Had WrenKitchens furloughed the workers instead of firing them, the British government would have covered 80 percent of their pay.“It’s a family business. They should understand that they’re putting a lot of families in difficult situations,” said Leo Ismail, 28, a trainee who lost his job. Mr. Ismail, who has a 17-month-old son, said he had enough savings to last a month.Unite, a British labor union, called WrenKitchens’ behavior “appalling.”“That this happened when the government has guaranteed the wages of furloughed workers makes Wren’s behavior particularly cruel,” Mike Wilkinson, a union official, said in a statement.WrenKitchens did not respond to requests for comment.There are increasing reports that some employers are abusing subsidized furlough programs, pocketing the government money while continuing to pressure employees to work.In France, over 900,000 firms have put eight million employees on “partial unemployment,” a government program like the ones in Germany and Britain designed to make sure people have incomes while their companies are shuttered.The French government reimburses employers about 84 percent of their workers’ net salaries on the condition that the employees don’t telecommute or perform other work full time. Many employers cover a portion of the remaining lost wages.But some French employees say they are being required to report to work even though their employer is collecting the subsidy.“We have cases where salespeople, gardeners and retail employees are being told to work” when their company has enrolled in the subsidy program, said Elie Lambert, the national secretary of the National Solidarity Union, a trade union representing workers in all sectors of the economy.“Or they’re told, ‘If you don’t want the company to die, you’ll work anyway,’” said Ms. Lambert, whose group has collected hundreds of complaints on a nationwide hotline in recent weeks.The reports have grown so numerous that the French Labor Ministry has threatened steep fines and jail time for employers fraudulently abusing the system.Freelancers and temp workers are particularly vulnerable when companies go looking for places to save.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.IBM’s Dutch unit told freelancers and contractors that they would have to accept a 25 percent cut in their compensation or be fired, RTL Z, a Dutch business channel, reported. IBM said in a statement that, in the interests of employing as many people as possible, “we are taking various actions involving some of our contractor work force.”In Germany, supermarkets have hired temporary security guards to limit the number of shoppers who are inside at any given time, in line with lockdown requirements. The Ver.di union has complained that these workers are being underpaid in violation of wage agreements.An association that represents security firms has told its members that the supermarket guards are entitled only to the German minimum wage of €9.35 an hour, rather than the wage negotiated with unions, according to Ver.di.The union wage is not that much higher, ranging from €10.60 an hour in some eastern German states to €11 in parts of western Germany.Security firms argue that people controlling traffic at supermarkets are more akin to ushers at a sports event than security guards, and therefore not entitled to as much pay. Silke Zöller, a spokeswoman for the industry association that supplies and pays security guards, said the minimum wage would apply only to a narrow subset of workers not covered by wage agreements.Some of these inequalities will disappear when lockdowns ease, as is already happening in Germany and other places. But some of the damage is permanent.Lufthansa initially agreed to pay 1,100 furloughed employees of Germanwings, another budget subsidiary, 90 percent of their pay — the same amount as workers at the parent company. But then Lufthansa decided to fold the unit, which had long had financial trouble. That means the employees are no longer eligible for the pay they would have received on furlough and must apply for unemployment benefits, which are usually lower.Lufthansa said it hoped to find jobs for Germanwings employees elsewhere in the company.At the same time, Lufthansa has also asked for government aid, warning that its existence is at stake and hinting that it may not be able to pay any furloughed employees more than they get from the government. Worker representatives said they planned to push political leaders to make any support conditional on better treatment of employees of the airline’s subsidiaries.“On the one side they ask for help for the state, and on the other side they refuse to top up salaries,” said Daniel Flohr, a Lufthansa flight attendant who is chairman of the Independent Organization of Flight Attendants, known in German as U.F.O. “That’s unacceptable.”