Disney Parks and Cruise Line Will Close in Response to Coronavirus
By Brooks BarnesEvery Disney theme park worldwide will be closed starting this weekend, including Disney World in Florida and the Disneyland Resort in California, because of the coronavirus pandemic, the company said on Thursday. Disney Cruise Line will also close.Disneyland Park and Disney California Adventure — two adjoining, but separately ticketed theme parks in Anaheim, Calif. — will close on Saturday morning through the end of the month. Disney’s three hotels in Anaheim will remain open until Monday.Disney also said that its four-ship cruise line would suspend new departures beginning Saturday until the end of the month.Disney World in Florida — six separately ticketed parks with combined annual attendance of 93 million — will close at the end of Sunday through the end of the month. Disney also operates roughly 30 hotels at the Florida resort, near Orlando. Those properties will remain open “until further notice,” the company said. The adjoining Disney Springs shopping and dining area will also remain open.Disneyland Paris will also close on Sunday evening through the end of the month. Its hotels will remain open.The company said it would continue to pay its employees while the parks are closed. Refunds will be given for hotel bookings during the closure period.In recent days, as sporting events, concerts and other mass gatherings have been canceled in response to the pandemic, Disneyland and Walt Disney World, its bigger sibling, remained crowded. So many people were trying to get on Space Mountain at Disneyland on Wednesday at 9 p.m. that the line stretched more than an hour. Disneyland’s Indiana Jones ride had a 45-minute line.Disneyland, the company’s original theme park, looms large in the popular imagination as the “happiest place on Earth,” where visitors trade an imperfect world for a perfect one. There is no trash blowing down Main Street U.S.A. Dream big, and the utopian technology of Tomorrowland just might come true. The animatronic figures inside It’s a Small World never stop smiling and singing. The park receives almost 19 million visitors from around the world each year.However, in a statement posted online shortly before midnight on Wednesday, Gov. Gavin Newsom said that gatherings of 250 or more people “should be canceled or postponed” to slow the spread of the coronavirus. “Changing our actions for a short period of time will save the life of one or more people you know,” Governor Newsom said. “That’s the choice before us. Each of us has extraordinary power to slow the spread of this disease.”That seemed to apply to Disneyland and other California theme parks, including Universal Studios in Los Angeles and Knott’s Berry Farm in Buena Park, Calif. But Mr. Newsom backtracked at a Thursday morning news conference, saying that his guidelines excluded large parks like Disneyland and places such as casinos and movie theaters because of “the complexity of their unique circumstances.”Disney made its announcement regarding Disneyland’s closing shortly thereafter.“After carefully reviewing the guidelines of the governor of California’s executive order and in the best interest of our guests and employees, we are proceeding with the closure of Disneyland Park and Disney California Adventure,” the company said in a statement. About three hours later, Disney announced the closure of Disney World, Disneyland Paris and Disney Cruise Line “in an abundance of caution and in the best interest of our guests and employees.”Disney World, which employs 75,000 people, has experience with sudden closures. The mega-resort has been shuttered for various lengths of time because of hurricanes, including Matthew in 2016, Frances in 2004 and Floyd in 1999.Disneyland, which employs roughly 31,000 people, has had unscheduled closures only two times since opening in 1955. The first time was in 1963 for a national day of mourning after the assassination of President Kennedy. The second was after the Sept. 11 attacks.The California resort has grown substantially since the last closing. It now consists of two popular theme parks: Disneyland and the adjacent California Adventure, which together recorded attendance of roughly 28.7 million in 2018, the last year for which figures are available. Disney also operates three hotels in Anaheim and a shopping district called Downtown Disney, which will remain open.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Hundreds of other businesses in Anaheim and the surrounding cities rely on Disneyland to keep their cash registers ringing, from nearby mom-and-pop motels to fast-food restaurants outside the park gates to busing companies that shuttle families to and from airports. A 2018 study by professors at California State University, Fullerton, found that the Disneyland resort had an $8.5 billion annual impact on Southern California.The coronavirus has already caused major problems for Disney overseas. The company’s entire Asian theme park operation has been closed for weeks — four parks in China and Japan that together attract 51.2 million visitors annually. Disney has said its China parks will remain shuttered until the end of March and perhaps longer, although its Shanghai property began what it called a “phased reopening” on March 9 by allowing guests to enter a shopping and dining area outside the park gates.Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo Disney Sea are scheduled to remain closed through early April. The Oriental Land Company owns those properties; Disney receives a royalty of about 7 percent of revenue.Disneyland Paris, which includes two separately ticketed parks with combined annual attendance of 15 million, has kept its gates open, although some experiences — princess meet-and-greets, the Illuminations fireworks show — have been canceled. France has banned public gatherings in some areas around Paris in a containment attempt.Over the weekend, a Disneyland Paris maintenance worker tested positive for the virus, according to a Disney spokesman, who added that the worker had no contact with guests.