Coronavirus Layoff Surge Overwhelms Unemployment Offices
By Tiffany Hsu and Tara Siegel BernardThe best place to get a job right now might be the unemployment office.In Washington State, where the coronavirus outbreak found its first foothold in the United States, officials are trying to fill multiple positions processing jobless claims.“Due to the temporary closure of some businesses here in Washington State we are anticipating the need for additional staffing,” according to the job posting, which promises interviews next week.It’s only the start of what will be a hiring boom by these government offices, which have been running on skeleton crews after years of historically low unemployment. Illinois, Louisiana, Massachusetts and Nebraska have also posted openings. Texas said it was trying to add people, too.transcriptI would just say enjoy your home. Stay. I would just say, right now. We have to get this problem fixed. Welcome to Miami!With the coronavirus pandemic triggering layoffs in industries from restaurants to retail — the Department of Labor said on Thursday that claims for jobless benefits surged 33 percent last week — states are about to be inundated. And their unemployment offices, long hindered by lumbering technology and bare-bones staffing, are already groaning under the weight.From New Jersey to Texas to Oregon, the newly jobless have tried to file claims, only to run into glitchy websites and clogged phone lines.Ryan Connolly was laid off by video chat on Tuesday from his job on a software development project for RDK Truck Sales & Service in Tampa, Fla. Within a few hours, he was on the county website trying to figure out unemployment benefits but couldn’t get past the first link. Every time he clicked, the loading wheel would circle interminably.“My heart just dropped, and I realized that I’m definitely not the only one scrambling here,” he said.It was obvious the site was overwhelmed by the volume, said Mr. Connolly, who is worried about his wife and two young daughters. They were on his health insurance.“As soon as I saw that, I realized that it was just going to be a nightmare,” he said.He kept trying on Tuesday. It didn’t get better. “I’ve given up,” he said Wednesday.Help is on the way. A stimulus bill that President Trump signed into law on Wednesday provides $1 billion in emergency grants to states for unemployment insurance, and fully half could be immediately used to strengthen staffing, technology and other administrative costs.The need is urgent. In Colorado, the number of unemployment benefit claims went from 400 on March 9 to 3,900 on Monday and then 10,000 on Wednesday. In Connecticut, there were 2,500 claims last week, but more than 40,000 from Friday evening until Wednesday evening. The number of requests in Ohio jumped to 78,000 this week from 6,500 two weeks ago.Maryland said that its website and call centers were experiencing “an unprecedented volume” of requests. The state’s division of unemployment insurance said it was extending its call center hours, working to increase its network’s bandwidth and asking claimants and employers to email.New York’s online application system crashed as it tried to accommodate a spike in volume that resembled the surge after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. By noon on Tuesday, the state labor department had received more than 21,000 calls, compared with 2,000 a week earlier. Visits to its website more than doubled. The department is now extending its hours and staggering filing times alphabetically by last name.Delta Vasquez, 22, spent several hours trying to slog through Oregon’s unemployment claims portal on Monday night after she was laid off from her hosting position at Bamboo Sushi in Portland. She and her co-workers got the news by email after the state moved to restrict bars and restaurants to takeout and delivery.Ms. Vasquez tried calling the unemployment office instead, but the line rang and eventually disconnected without sending her to voice mail. She tried online again, but the site was confusing — it has operating hours, and stops accepting new claims at 10 p.m. on weekdays.Ms. Vasquez restarted the online claims process twice before managing to fill out the necessary forms. “If you’re not working, you can’t save money,” she said. “The only resource is unemployment insurance.”Even when unemployment was stable and low, state employment offices were “threadbare,” said Andrew Stettner, a senior fellow with the Century Foundation, a public policy research group.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.State unemployment insurance programs rely on federal grants to pay for the administration of benefits, but those costs have been cut by 30 percent over the past two decades, he said.Part of the reason for low staffing: Unemployment office head counts are pegged to the unemployment rate, which had reached historic lows before the pandemic hit.Even in normal times, unemployment offices struggled with busy signals and website problems, said Julia Simon-Mishel, a supervising attorney in the unemployment compensation unit at Philadelphia Legal Assistance. “So we expect there to be issues with the website and phone lines across the country now.”Further complicating matters are the outdated systems most offices use. Pennsylvania is partway through a technology overhaul, but “a lot of states are still operating on their old mainframe computer systems that are most likely not set up for remote access,” Ms. Simon-Mishel said.At the same time, some states are undertaking emergency measures to expand and speed up workers’ access to benefits. Montana officials said that people forced by employers to stay home, or who are quarantined or caring for a family member with coronavirus, can qualify for benefits. Wisconsin, where nearly half of job center locations are closed because of the outbreak, loosened rules that require claimants to actively search for work. Arkansas, California, Virginia and other states have waived the waiting period before workers can receive aid.But that still requires applicants to get through the front door.Desperate, many laid-off employees began requesting donations and posting links to their GoFundMe, Venmo and Cash accounts. The website for one charity group was overrun with people hoping to apply for its bartender emergency assistance program.Eilís Godfrey, 27, learned on Sunday night that the restaurant where she worked as a server in Los Angeles was closing its doors. She and her colleagues gathered in a back room, usually reserved for private parties, to watch the city’s mayor, Eric Garcetti, who ordered the closing of many businesses and said dine-in service at restaurants must stop. The spin studio where she worked the front desk also closed that night.On Monday, Ms. Godfrey tried to apply for unemployment benefits, but realized that she needed to gather her pay stubs, tax return and other information. On Tuesday, she could no longer get access to California’s unemployment benefits site, and couldn’t get through on the phone, either.So she went back to her computer, where, she said, she spent hours “just refreshing the page.”