Internet Providers Won’t Cut Off Users Over Unpaid Bills for 60 Days
By Johnny DiazAT&T, Comcast and dozens of other telecommunications firms have committed to not disconnecting service to residential and small business customers who can’t pay their bills because of the coronavirus outbreak, the Federal Communications Commission said on Friday.The pledge the companies plan to implement also calls for them to open public Wi-Fi hot spots and waive late fees for 60 days.“I don’t want any American consumers experiencing hardships because of the pandemic to lose connectivity,” the commission’s chairman, Ajit Pai, said on Friday.As cases of the coronavirus spread across the country, companies have encouraged employees to work more from home. Schools and students are relying on the internet for remote online learning, and doctors and medical professionals are using it for video consultations with patients.“We know that more Americans than ever before will need internet access for work, education, and health care,” Jessica Rosenworcel, an F.C.C. commissioner, said on Friday. “We also know that this crisis will expose hard truths about the scope for the digital divide.”She highlighted the need to have students connected as classes shift to virtual learning because schools have closed.Ms. Rosenworcel also noted the importance of maintaining connectivity for hospitals, and for patients being treated for the coronavirus and those who are quarantined. “Where data caps and overage fees are in place, they need to be lifted and eliminated,” she said.Mr. Pai said that at least 69 companies had agreed to the F.C.C.’s “Keep Americans Connected Pledge.”It was unclear whether customers would have to provide some type of proof of economic hardship related to the coronavirus.“We expect each company that takes the pledge to abide by it and to implement appropriate procedures to ensure that it does,” the commission’s press secretary, Tina Pelkey, said on Saturday.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.John Legere, chief executive of T-Mobile, said Friday on Twitter that “for the next 60 days, we’re ensuring ALL @TMobile & @MetroByTMobile customers that are on plans with data have the connection they depend on.” The company is also boosting its data allowance free for schools and students for the next 60 days.AT&T said it would not terminate service for home phone, broadband residential or small business customers “because of their inability to pay their bill” related to the coronavirus. The company also said it would waive late service payment fees and keep public Wi-Fi hot spots open “for any American who needs them.”Comcast said it was making its Xfinity Wi-Fi hot spots available for free and providing unlimited data at no additional charge for the next 60 days. The company is also allowing new customers to receive 60 days of complimentary Internet Essentials service, which is available to qualified low-income families for $9.95 per month.Mr. Pai applauded the companies that had signed on to the pledge.