Labor Fight Collides With the Pandemic at Trader Joe’s
By David Yaffe-BellanyOn March 23, as the coronavirus pandemic put grocery workers on the front lines of a public health crisis, Trader Joe’s sent a memo to store managers encouraging them to relay a message to employees: Joining a union might be a bad idea.“It’s not like buying toothpaste you don’t end up liking,” said the email, which listed a series of anti-union talking points, including a warning about the size of dues. “It’s like buying a house … you’re in for the long term.”The pandemic has led to a wave of worker activism in recent weeks, as employees at Instacart, Amazon and Whole Foods have gone on strike and demanded increased protections. At Trader Joe’s, a chain known for its outwardly cheerful work force, employees have criticized what they describe as the company’s haphazard response to the crisis, reigniting a debate about union organizing that has simmered for years.Workers hoping to form a union recently circulated a petition calling for Trader Joe’s to offer “hazard pay,” or an hourly rate of time and a half. And over the last few weeks, the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union has held talks with employees.That nascent organizing effort seems to have alarmed Trader Joe’s. At the end of March, store managers gave anti-union lectures during regularly scheduled “huddles" with staff, using talking points from the email. In one case, a regional manager visited stores to argue that the hazard pay petition was an opportunistic attempt to seduce workers into joining a union.At a store in Philadelphia, the manager told a group of about 30 employees that “a union is a business and they’re trying to take your money,” according to two employees who attended the meeting. A store manager at a Trader Joe’s in Maryland said that joining a union was like getting married and that “once you’re in, it’s very hard to get out,” according to an employee who heard the comment.Managers at stores across the United States held similar discussions as worker unrest intensified, according to nearly 20 current and former employees. Most of the workers spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retaliation from the company. But in interviews, they said it felt as though the chain was taking advantage of a moment of anxiety to drive home an anti-union message.“They are sitting around there worried about it because they are anti-union and this is the perfect time for us to unionize,” said Kris King, a longtime Trader Joe’s employee in Louisville, Ky. “They feel vulnerable.”A company spokeswoman, Kenya Friend-Daniel, said in a statement that Trader Joe’s has “the right to express our opinion to crew members about the pros and cons of possible unionization.” Trader Joe’s is hardly the only retailer to actively oppose unionization. While workers at the grocery chain Kroger are unionized, Walmart has moved aggressively to squelch organizing efforts over the years.“Because a union has chosen to inject itself into the lives of our crew members during this time of crisis,” Ms. Friend-Daniel said, “we have no alternative but to remind and share with our crew members the facts.”Like many grocery chains, Trader Joe’s has taken a range of steps to protect employees during the pandemic, including cutting hours and closing stores. The company already has a reputation for generous pay and benefits, and it has offered bonuses to employees working during the pandemic, as well as a week of paid sick time to workers dealing with respiratory ailments.But workers said the week of paid leave was insufficient, and noted that many of the bonuses distributed so far have amounted to only a couple of hundred dollars or less. They also expressed misgivings about the inconsistent safety measures across stores, where some managers have banned gloves and face masks, saying they frighten customers.Juan Boria, an employee at a Trader Joe’s in the East Village in Manhattan, said he went to work last week wearing a mask made with fabric cut from a Hawaiian shirt so it would resemble the rest of the company uniform.“I couldn’t tell you how many times I’d had customers coughing on their way up to me, touching their faces and grabbing items off the cart,” Mr. Boria said.A manager told him not to wear the mask in front of customers and sent him to the stockroom, where he found it difficult to stay six feet away from his co-workers. Mr. Boria left in the middle of the shift, fearing for his safety.At various times, Trader Joe’s has said employees are allowed to wear masks and gloves. But individual stores have adopted different protocols, and some of the chain’s messages have confused employees.“It is necessary to eliminate all lingering questions or confusion and set the record straight,” a company official wrote in an email to employees last month. “Trader Joe’s official policy on gloves is that we don’t have a policy. We never have.”Now, however, medical experts are beginning to recommend protective equipment for retail workers. Ms. Friend-Daniel said Trader Joe’s planned to supply masks for its stores, as other chains, like Walmart, have begun to do.Employees have also complained about delays in closing stores where workers test positive for the virus. At a meeting on March 20, a manager at the Trader Joe’s in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan told employees that a co-worker was infected, according to interviews with employees and social media messages about the meeting. But the store did not officially close for a deep clean until six days later, when Trader Joe’s announced that multiple employees had tested positive.The spokeswoman, Ms. Friend-Daniel, did not explain that delay. But the measures Trader Joe’s takes in response to infections “vary with the circumstances of the potential exposure,” she said.The coronavirus pandemic is not the first time employees at Trader Joe’s have mobilized to change company policy or that executives have pushed back. Over the years, company officials have aggressively opposed unionization, employees said, taking workers aside to track down rumors about efforts to organize staff.Last spring, a transgender employee at a store in Albuquerque was told they could not wear a pin showing their preferred pronouns because the regional manager believed pronoun pins “do not reflect the values of our neighborhood stores,” the employee, Ezra Greene, wrote in a Facebook group for Trader Joe’s workers.After other workers protested, the chain started allowing pins, as long as they were only an inch in diameter. Mx. Greene left Trader Joe’s last summer. Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The incident helped re-energize discussions about unionization that had simmered since 2016, when an employee in Manhattan complained to federal authorities that he was fired after managers judged his smile to be insufficiently “genuine.” In Louisville, Mr. King said Trader Joe’s had mostly treated him well. But last week, he started a Facebook group for workers to discuss how the store was handling the pandemic. On Saturday, he was fired.Mr. King had already been written up twice over the last year, he said, including for playfully tossing quinoa in the direction of a co-worker. The Facebook page was the final straw.“This is not how we operate,” he said his manager told him. “We don’t operate by letting crew talk amongst themselves.”Ms. Friend-Daniel did not dispute the details of Mr. King’s firing, though she said the company allowed employees to communicate on Facebook. The store manager in Louisville did not respond to a request for comment.For his part, Mr. King said he would continue helping his former co-workers, who plan to submit a proposal to Trader Joe’s requesting greater protections during the pandemic.“They’re family to me,” he said, “and I’ll do whatever I can.”