Money, Morality and a Challenge to Silicon Valley
 On our radar: L Brands is said to be close to a deal to sell control of Victoria’s Secret to the investment firm Sycamore Partners. (Want this in your inbox each morning? Sign up here.)Silicon Valley is abuzz over a series of tweets from Chamath Palihapitiya, the venture capitalist and provocateur, suggesting that investment firms and start-ups should look more closely at who’s giving them money.• Referring to investment firms’ limited partners, or investors, he tweeted: “What if the LPs money was stolen by an autocratic leader? What if their family made guns or alcohol or tobacco? What if they believe in Pro-Life vs Pro-Choice or No-Guns vs Ok-Guns?”• “The best GPs should know that they can pick their Capital partner and I would encourage them to ask tougher questions of their LPs.”• “Why make the Harvard endowment any more money? What systemic bias do you perpetuate?”Mr. Palihapitiya’s tweets were inspired by a WSJ investigation into how the Mormon Church secretly built a $100 billion investment portfolio. (He added on Twitter that he has “ZERO” issues with the church.)Andrew’s take:• This conversation started over a year ago around Saudi Arabia’s investments in Uber and SoftBank’s Vision Fund, after the dissident writer Jamal Khashoggi was murdered in a Saudi consulate.• But the decibel level is getting louder, and such questions may become a larger part of big investors’ decisions.A programming note: Marcelo Claure, SoftBank’s C.O.O. and WeWork’s chairman, will talk with Andrew on “Squawk Box” at 8 a.m. It will be Mr. Claure’s first interview since WeWork named a new C.E.O. — and comes amid reports of trouble for SoftBank’s next Vision Fund.Netflix might have hoped that this year’s Academy Awards would be its breakthrough. It came away disappointed.• Netflix was up for 24 awards last night, but won two: best supporting actress for Laura Dern in “Marriage Story” and best documentary for “American Factory.”• And it had spent an estimated $70 million selling Oscar voters on its nominees, which included “Marriage Story” and “The Irishman.”• The big winner instead was the South Korean satire “Parasite,” which became the first non-English-language movie to win best picture.Victory for “Parasite” was “a defining moment,” writes Kelly Gilblom of Bloomberg, “in the globalization of Hollywood, which had previously favored homegrown films over foreign-language fare.”But don’t feel too bad for Netflix. As Ryan Faughnder of the LA Times notes, the streaming giant plans to spend $17.3 billion on content this year. And all those nominations had already burnished its street cred. So what’s an extra $70 million?More: Jeff Bezos came in for some ribbing by Chris Rock: “Jeff is so rich, he got divorced and he’s still the richest man in the world. He saw ‘Marriage Story’ and thought it was a comedy.”The attorney general made waves last week when he suggested that the U.S. back takeovers of Nokia or Ericsson, Huawei of China’s European rivals on 5G networking — or buy them outright. But his colleagues in the Trump administration don’t seem keen.• Larry Kudlow, the president’s chief economic adviser, said the U.S. “is not in the business of buying companies, whether they’re domestic or foreign,” according to David Shepardson of Reuters, though he added there was “nothing to prohibit” American tech companies from making the move.• And Vice President Mike Pence said the administration would follow a plan laid out by the Federal Communications Commission’s chairman to free up more 5G spectrum.Those comments probably dampened investors’ hopes for a takeover or two. Shares in both Nokia and Ericsson jumped on Friday — but were down in trading this morning.Goldman Sachs has made it very clear that it wants to be known for more than investment banking and trading. But some impending departures may set back its private equity ambitions.• Sumit Rajpal and Andrew Wolff, two of the three heads of a big private investing unit, are retiring, Dakin Campbell of Business Insider reports. The division will now be run by the remaining head, Julian Salisbury.• Mr. Rajpal and Mr. Wolff were expected to lead Goldman’s latest private equity fund, which was scheduled to begin formal fund-raising this week with a target of $8 billion.Goldman’s C.E.O., David Solomon, was warned this might happen when he decided to combine several investment teams into one division, Mr. Campbell reports.• Rich Friedman, the chairman of the private-investing unit, had “resisted the plan from the start.”Why it matters: Goldman has hoped to raise $100 billion more in private equity assets over the next five years, Liz Hoffman of the WSJ points out, challenging the likes of Blackstone and KKR. Infighting probably won’t help.The Information, which Jessica Lessin founded in 2013 to dive deep into tech news, costs $399 a year. But the tech elite doesn’t seem to mind ponying up, another sign that subscriptions can sustain a healthy news outlet, Ed Lee of the NYT writes.• “She pays competitive salaries (albeit without equity) — as much as $180,000 or more for some top reporters,” Mr. Lee writes.• The site has regularly broken big stories, like sexual harassment allegations against a venture capital mogul and management problems at Google’s Nest division.• Subscribers include James Murdoch and Laurene Powell Jobs.What Ms. Lessin doesn’t do is take advertising or venture capital, though she started The Information with “less than $1 million” of her share of her family’s fortune. (She and her husband, Sam Lessin, are the children of wealthy investors.)But she still has hurdles to clear. She might have to hit 40,000 paying readers by this year to meet sales objectives — when she only passed 20,000 around the middle of last year, Mr. Lee reports.Of course, it didn’t hurt Bill Gates to have Roger Federer as his doubles partner. And the match was for charity.That said, Mr. Gates “played one pinpoint lob volley that the announcer described as ‘the billionaire’s touch,’” according to the AP.Deals• Alibaba and other Chinese investors are pulling back from Silicon Valley. (FT)• Henry Ellenbogen, the former star start-up investor at T. Rowe Price, has raised about $6 billion for his new investment fund. (FT)Politics and policy• President Trump is set to unveil his budget proposal today, which cuts $4.4 trillion in spending, but keeps a federal deficit until 2035. (NYT)• The economy is exactly where Mr. Trump wants it. (Upshot)• Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez referred to the economist “Milton Keynes” over the weekend, merging two wildly different men into one English town. (Daily Mail)Tech• Ransomware attacks are increasingly crippling cities and businesses. (NYT)• A deep dive into QAnon, the pro-Trump conspiracy theory, and its consequences. (NYT)• Employees at SoftBank’s Vision Fund reportedly often feel pressure to do deals, even ones they think ill-advised. (Information)Best of the rest• Real estate industry groups are challenging New York’s ban on rental broker fees. (NYT)• Doug Hodge, the former Pimco C.E.O. given nine months in prison for his part in the college admissions scandal, writes, “I should have listened to my conscience.” (WSJ Opinion)• The first speaking engagement for Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, since stepping back from British royal family duties? A JPMorgan Chase investment conference in Miami. (Page Six)