Starbucks Goes From Sip and Stay to Grab and Go
By Jacey FortinThere was a new sign affixed to Starbucks doors across the United States on Monday. “We have temporarily closed our seating area, but we remain open to serve you,” it said. “Please accept our apologies for any inconvenience.”The floor was unusually empty at one location in Upper Manhattan, with tables and chairs stacked near the windows.The milk and cream were missing from their usual spot (but available upon request, according to a sign). One woman with a pastry in a paper bag lingered to get access to the store’s Wi-Fi with her phone until a barista apologetically explained to her that, according to a new policy, she had to leave.Starbucks, the biggest coffee chain in the United States, has long marketed itself as a “third place” where customers could order a latte but also sit for a prolonged time with a notebook, newspaper or laptop. Bonus points for a table near an electrical outlet, or maybe a window seat.But in a statement on Sunday, the company said it was temporarily “pausing the use of all seating, including both the cafe and patio areas,” in its locations in the United States and Canada.Customers can still order drinks and snacks using the Starbucks app and by delivery or drive-through. Many shops are open for customers to grab and go, but for at least two weeks, they won’t be able to sit and sip.At a time of social distancing, many offices are off limits and service and retail businesses large and small are experimenting with ways to stem the spread of the coronavirus.Those who need to work remotely might have seen Starbucks as a good place to get things done. Now, that, too, is off the table.Howard Frank, a writer in Stroudsburg, Pa., said he regularly visited his local Starbucks on days when he worked from home. He is typically there for a few hours at a time, sitting in his favorite spot at a long table off to the side, next to a power outlet and away from foot traffic.He learned on Monday that the seating areas would be closed. “I was really bummed,” he said. Now he plans to work from home, where it will be easier to get distracted by the refrigerator, the television or the dog.But Mr. Frank, 63, said he understood the reason for the change. “All demographics visit Starbucks, and it’s just an incubation ground for anything that might be going around,” he said. “So I think it was a prudent decision on their part.”The coffee chain, which has more than 10,000 company-owned outlets in the United States and Canada, is not alone.Tim Hortons, the popular Canadian fast-food chain, announced that it would close its dining areas beginning Tuesday to focus on takeout, drive-through and delivery service. Dunkin’ said on Monday that it was reducing hours, removing tables and limiting its service to drive-through and carryout at its restaurants in the United States.On Monday, the governors of Connecticut, New Jersey and New York announced broad restrictions on public life in those states: Casinos, gyms and movie theaters will be closed starting Monday evening, they said, and bars and restaurants will be limited to takeout and delivery.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Some Starbucks locations in high-traffic areas, like malls and campuses, will be temporarily closed entirely, the company said.“As we all know, the situation with Covid-19 is extremely dynamic and we will continue to review the facts and science and make the proactive decisions necessary to protect our partners, customers and communities,” said Rossann Williams, the executive who oversees the company’s 200,000 workers in the United States.“Partners” is the term Starbucks uses for its employees, including baristas.The company last week told its employees in the United States that it would provide up to two weeks of paid leave to any employee who was infected with the virus or had extended contact with a co-worker or household member who tested positive.Starbucks had previously responded to the spread of coronavirus by prohibiting customers from using their own cups and putting in place a strict cleaning regimen, telling employees to wash their hands and disinfect “high-touch” surfaces every 30 minutes.Last week, some employees expressed concern about the added work, especially because many Starbucks locations follow a lean staffing model.