Economic Powers Vow to Fight Crisis
By Jack Ewing and Jeanna SmialekCentral bankers and political leaders of the United States and other economic powers expressed their resolve to combat economic damage from the coronavirus on Tuesday, but stopped short of promising interest rate cuts or other immediate rescue measures.The joint statement of solidarity from the leaders of the so-called G7 nations, which also includes Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan, was intended to show global coordination and cooperation. But it fell short of the more aggressive action that investors have been hoping for and that many economists say could help to prevent the virus outbreak from undermining global growth.Investors were underwhelmed and markets in the U.S. opened down, with the S&P 500 index sliding as much as 0.8 percent in early trading. European stock indexes dropped on the G7 announcement before recovering some of those losses.Global finance ministers and central bankers said they “are closely monitoring the spread of the coronavirus disease” and that “given the potential impacts” of the virus on global growth, “we reaffirm our commitment to use all appropriate policy tools to achieve strong, sustainable growth and safeguard against downside risks.”Officials promised no concrete plans, only a commitment to use their taxing and spending authorities “where appropriate” to help mitigate any economic impact.“Alongside strengthening efforts to expand health services, G7 finance ministers are ready to take actions, including fiscal measures where appropriate, to aid in the response to the virus and support the economy during this phase,” the statement said.Global policymakers added that “central banks will continue to fulfill their mandates, thus supporting price stability and economic growth while maintaining the resilience of the financial system.”That pledge falls far short of the coordinated global rate cut that investors had been anticipating from the world’s largest economies.“It was all a nothing-burger,” said Seth Carpenter, an economist at UBS and a former top researcher at the Fed Board. “It’s the ‘where appropriate’ that makes you go — OK, it’s more rhetoric than content.”“The market got very bulled up on the idea of something happening today before markets opened,” he added.Mr. Mnuchin, who participated in the G7 call, said the Trump administration is working with other countries to do everything possible to curb the spread of the virus and limit its harm on the global economy.“The administration is closely monitoring the coronavirus and its effect on public health as well as any effects on supply chains, markets and the broader economy,” Mr. Mnuchin said at a hearing before House lawmakers. He said the White House wants to work closely with Congress on an emergency funding package.President Trump on Monday night called on Democrats to pass a temporary payroll tax cut but Representative Richard E. Neal, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, told Mr. Mnuchin that any stimulus package should be centered around infrastructure investment rather than additional tax cuts. Mr. Mnuchin said that infrastructure would be central to any such package.“If there’s a need to stimulate the economy as a result of the coronavirus, I’m sure that infrastructure is a priority of the president,” Mr. Mnuchin said.The mere fact that the G7 held an emergency gathering underlines what a fraught moment this is for the world’s economy. The coronavirus outbreak has torn across the globe, sickening about 90,000 people. While the vast majority of those are still in China, where the infections first surfaced, major outbreaks have also taken hold in South Korea, Japan, Iran and Italy, and cases are climbing in other countries. Six deaths have been reported in the United States.The virus could exact a heavy economic toll in the G7 countries, as it leads to quarantines, shutters factories, and hits investor and consumer confidence. But central bankers have limited ability to act, because borrowing costs are already low across major economies.While the Federal Reserve still has leeway to cut interest rates, the European Central Bank and Bank of Japan have spent the last decade struggling to lift inflation and growth, all but exhausting their monetary policy weapons. They will probably prefer to husband their resources until the extent of the economic damage becomes clearer.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.That has not prevented markets from looking to central banks for a first-line response. Australia’s central bank cut its main policy rate to 0.5 percent Tuesday, a record low, and Malaysia cut rates for the second time this year. Investors anticipate rate cuts as early as this month from the European Central Bank, Bank of England and Federal Reserve, based on money market pricing.“It is too early to tell how persistent the effects of the coronavirus will be and at what point the global economy will return to an improving path,” Philip Lowe, Australia’s central bank governor, said in a statement.Political leaders in hard-hit countries such as Italy have been promising relief to businesses whose sales have collapsed because people are staying home and factories are closed. But governments in countries like Germany have been reluctant to increase spending, which would mean taking on more debt.Expectations for a rate cut by the Fed have grown in recent days, with investors now pricing in a 50 basis point cut in March. The Fed chair, Jerome H. Powell, on Friday signaled the Fed was ready to act as appropriate, but stopped short of promising action.President Trump has continued to pressure Mr. Powell to cut rates, saying the central bank is putting the United States at a disadvantage to other countries with lower borrowing costs. He did so again on Tuesday morning, saying in a tweet that Mr. Powell, “has called it wrong from day one. Sad!”