It’s Not All Bad. Here’s Proof.
We did something different with today’s newsletter, highlighting some of the more heartening things we’ve seen in the past few weeks, as the world mobilizes against the coronavirus pandemic. Send us your examples, stay safe and be well. (Want this in your inbox each morning? Sign up here.)Apparel companies are retooling to make masks and other protective garments. Factories that churn out T-shirts in the Carolinas. A company in Pennsylvania that makes uniforms for baseball teams. European luxury brands like Prada and Gucci. Across the world, clothing manufacturers are converting their workshops to produce much-needed medical equipment.The production of ventilators and N95 respirators is particularly critical, and some deep-pocketed companies, like Apple, Facebook and Salesforce, are using their clout to source supplies. Ford, G.M. and Tesla are also tapping their supply chains and looking into building ventilators to send to hospitals. (Though admittedly, coordination among the state, local and federal governments in directing these efforts could be much better.)Tech companies are donating their huge computing power to crunch data in the search for a cure. A consortium including Amazon, Google, IBM and Microsoft was recently formed to enlist their supercomputers in making calculations and modeling scenarios for the spread of the disease.Distilleries and breweries are making hand sanitizer, with  Anheuser-Busch InBev, Diageo and Pernod Ricard rejigging their operations to meet shortages. Surplus alcohol generated from alcohol-free beers has come in handy for the process.Leaders are learning about empathy as they try to manage multinational companies from their spare rooms. “This is a human crisis, and companies need to treat their employees in a human-centric way,” Natasha Lamb of Arjuna Capital told the NYT. Tending to employees’ mental health is important, of course, but so is helping them weather the blow by compensating for lost hours, covering sick pay, assisting with child care and avoiding layoffs (especially since government help is on the way).🏭 Pollution has fallen dramatically in major urban areas as people have stayed home.Volunteers are stepping up, with homebound Americans firing up their sewing machines to make masks and others using 3-D printers to produce face shields for doctors and nurses on the front lines. N.Y.U. medical students volunteered to graduate early so they could start internships at city hospitals sooner. And when the British government asked for 250,000 volunteers to help deliver food, medicine and other support to vulnerable people in self-quarantine, more than 500,000 people signed up.We’ve learned to recreate some life experiences online, and not just the angry shouting matches on Twitter people might expect. The NYT’s Kevin Roose notes that the internet has made possible virtual yoga classes, “cloud clubbing” on TikTok and online cocktail hours. (WhatsApperitifs, anyone? Sorry.)Cultural institutions have opened their doors, digitally speaking. The Metropolitan Opera in New York and the Royal Opera House in London are putting on free virtual shows most nights, while the Metropolitan Museum of Art has begun its #MetAnywhere campaign, making more of its collections available digitally. The NYT is keeping a running list of options.There are moments of joy that spring up amid the crisis, including musical performances on balconies and nightly applause for the medical workers putting their lives on the line to care for the sick (Prime Minister Boris Johnson and members of the royal family took part in the British version last night).🐶 Here’s a shut-in Italian and his dog doing yoga.D.J. D-Nice’s epic Instagram Live sets have featured a huge array of celebs — was that Rihanna? Mark Zuckerberg? Michelle Obama? — popping in to the virtual party as he spins tracks for hours. “We’re in Club Quarantine, but we ain’t gonna let corona stop us,” he shouted during the initial set last week, which has become a recurring thing. Some of Berlin’s famous nightclubs are also live streaming sets from D.J.s in (empty) venues every night.Washing your hands properly has never been groovier, with Neil Diamond adapting “Sweet Caroline” for the coronavirus age; Gloria Gaynor singing that, yes, we will survive; and an array of Broadway composers and performers reminding us that “20 seconds isn’t that long.”The sports world is getting in on the action, too. There aren’t any professional events to cover, so Nick Heath, a rugby commentator in London, turned his talents to doing play-by-play of scenes of ordinary life, as has the American commentary booth stalwart Joe Buck. The former M.L.B. great Alex Rodriguez is running a virtual baseball clinic. And the N.B.A. star Steph Curry of the Golden State Warriors interviewed Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases about how to stay safe.🐻 Children are embarking on “bear hunts” during walks, looking for stuffed animals that neighbors perch in their windows.“We are all in this together as a global community. For me, the best way I’ve found to get past this anxiety is to focus on what I can do each day to make a small difference. Each of us, wherever we are, has the opportunity to do the same — take an action driven by hope, a small step that makes things a bit better.” — Satya Nadella of Microsoft“Frame this as a massive investment in U.S. public health.” — James Bullard of the St. Louis Federal Reserve Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“This is a temporary state. It helps to say it. I worked for 10 years in the hospital system. I’ve been trained for situations like this. I’ve also studied the 1918 flu pandemic. The precautions we’re taking are the right ones. History tells us that. This is survivable. We will survive. This is a time to overprotect but not overreact.” — David Kessler, author and expert in grief counseling• The U.S. now leads the world in the number of confirmed coronavirus cases, with at least 85,000 known infections.• Real estate tycoons, sunscreen makers and student lenders are among the many industries in line to benefit from the $2 trillion stimulus package.• Big banks are putting off planned job cuts, to cover staffing shortages and to prepare for a potential burst of activity when the pandemic subsides.• Orange juice futures are soaring as demand rises among health-conscious consumers.• You might expect food delivery services to flourish in these times. Here’s why they’re not.The New York Times is providing free access to the most up-to-date information and expert guidance on the coronavirus pandemic at nytimes.com/coronavirus. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.Best wishes to Peter Tuchman, “the most photographed man on Wall Street,” on a speedy recovery. 