U.A.W. Says Automakers Will Address Coronavirus Concerns at Car Plants
By Neal E. BoudetteThe United Automobile Workers union said Tuesday night that the three Detroit automakers had agreed to address concerns about coronavirus hazards to factory workers by taking steps short of shutting down U.S. production.General Motors, Ford Motor and Fiat Chrysler had been resisting calls by the union to shut down their plants for two weeks to minimize the spread of the virus among factory workers. In separate meetings with the U.A.W. on Tuesday evening, the union said, the companies promised a variety of measures to keep workers apart inside factories and to extend time for cleaning work stations and common areas.“All three companies have agreed to new measures that will increase adherence to the C.D.C. recommendations on social distancing in the workplace,” the U.A.W. president, Rory Gamble, said in a statement, referring to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.He added that the three companies had agreed to partial shutdowns at certain times to allow for thorough cleaning of plants and extended periods between shifts. Shift schedules at some plants may be altered to reduce the number of workers entering each day.G.M., Ford and Fiat Chrysler each said they would provide details this week.“The health and safety of our work force is our top priority,” Ford said in a statement. “We’re working closely with the U.A.W. and are aiming to announce details in the next 24 hours.”The automakers together employ about 151,000 U.A.W. workers.In an email sent to members earlier on Tuesday, Mr. Gamble said he had requested a two-week factory shutdown in a meeting on Sunday with the chief executives of the three companies, whose continued operation of U.S. factories has been in sharp contrast to the move by automakers in Europe to shut down manufacturing.“Your U.A.W. leadership feels very strongly, and argued very strongly, that this is the most responsible course of action,” Mr. Gamble said in the email. “The companies, however, were not willing to implement this request.”The union and the Detroit automakers formed a task force on Sunday to address how to protect workers during the coronavirus outbreak. The group includes Mr. Gamble and three chief executives — Mary T. Barra of G.M., Jim Hackett of Ford and Mike Manley of Fiat Chrysler — as well other union officials and the manufacturing and health executives from the companies.In his email, Mr. Gamble suggested that the union was prepared to increase pressure on the carmakers if they did not agree to a shutdown.“These companies will be put on notice that the U.A.W. will use any and all measures to protect our brothers and sisters,” he wrote.Jim Cain, a G.M. spokesman, said the company was trying to keep factory workers safe while being mindful of the potential economic impact of a broad shutdown and of the hardship employees could face if they were no longer earning paychecks.“It’s not just workers, but it’s suppliers,” he said, noting that the auto industry represents “billions of dollars of value” to the U.S. economy. “The longer we can keep working, the better off everybody is,” he said.Automobile and auto-parts manufacturing makes up about 4 percent of the U.S. economy.G.M., Ford and Fiat Chrysler have all restricted domestic and international travel and told office workers to work remotely.G.M. has reported one coronavirus infection in its work force, at its technical center in Warren, Mich. The company said it had a medical team assisting the employee’s family and had told others who have been in contact with the affected employee to isolate themselves for 14 days.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“The health and safety of our employees is our top priority,” the company said in a statement.Workers at a Ford truck plant in Dearborn, Mich., filed a written grievance against the company on Monday, calling for a shutdown of U.S. factories.“There’s a lot of concern, just like all across the nation,” said Todd Dunn, president of U.A.W. Local 862, which represents workers at two Ford truck plants in Kentucky. He said many members of his local were scrambling to be able to get to work because day care centers in Kentucky had been ordered closed.Mr. Dunn said he and his members worried both about the spread of the virus and about the prospect of losing income. “People still have to pay their mortgages,” he said.On Tuesday, Ford joined Daimler, Nissan, Volkswagen and other major carmakers in shutting down manufacturing operations in Europe.Ford said the suspension would take effect Thursday and last “for a number of weeks” depending on the spread of the pandemic, as well as disruptions to supply chains, government restrictions on travel, and declines in sales.