PG&E Chief Executive to Retire in June
By Ivan Penn and Peter EavisPacific Gas & Electric said on Wednesday that its chief executive, Bill Johnson, would retire at the end of June after seeing the troubled company through its bankruptcy.Mr. Johnson, a utility industry veteran, joined PG&E last May after it was forced to seek bankruptcy protection because of billions of dollars in claims from wildfires started by its equipment.“I joined PG&E to help get the company out of bankruptcy and stabilize operations. By the end of June, I expect that both of these goals will have been met,” Mr. Johnson said in a statement.When PG&E’s board announced Mr. Johnson’s appointment, it did not suggest that his tenure would be short. In a statement at the time, the board said he was “the right leader for PG&E as we work to strengthen our safety culture and navigate a complex and challenging period in our company’s history.”Consecutive years of devastating wildfires upended PG&E, the largest utility in California and one of the largest in the country, leaving it with an estimated $30 billion in fire liabilities when it filed for bankruptcy protection in early 2019. One of the wildfires started by the company’s equipment, the 2018 Camp Fire, killed 85 people and destroyed the town of Paradise.PG&E recently agreed to plead guilty to involuntary manslaughter for all but one of those deaths. A state court is expected to review that plea deal on May 26. The company was earlier convicted of six federal felonies after a gas pipeline explosion killed eight people in the San Francisco Bay Area in 2010.Mr. Johnson became the face of PG&E’s efforts to improve its safety record. While the company avoided any fires as destructive as the Camp Fire in the last year, it was heavily criticized for cutting off power to millions of California residents during dry and windy conditions last year to prevent its equipment from causing fires.The company was widely seen as bungling the power shut offs, which left many areas in Northern and Central California without electricity for days on end. PG&E’s website, which was meant to inform people about impending shut-offs, went down, and many local government officials said they couldn’t reach the company’s management.“I think that the thought process was, there needed to be change from the top down, and there needed to be a cultural shift,” said Chris Holden, head of the California Assembly energy committee. “I think it does underscore the opportunity for the utility to move forward in a new direction.”Before joining PG&E, Mr. Johnson led the Tennessee Valley Authority, a utility owned by the federal government. And prior to that role, he was fired from Duke Energy after holding the top job there for less than a day. Duke, which is based in North Carolina, had just merged with Progress Energy, which Mr. Johnson led.Progress Energy gained notoriety for critically damaging a nuclear plant in Florida during an unusual, do-it-yourself upgrade that Mr. Johnson oversaw. The failed project forced the plant to be decommissioned. Duke paid Mr. Johnson a severance worth an estimated $44 million.Last year, PG&E said Mr. Johnson would receive a base salary of $2.5 million a year and a $3 million “transition payment” on his first day. He was also entitled to receive stock compensation potentially worth millions of dollars.The company said that William Smith, who joined PG&E’s board last year, would serve as interim chief executive until a permanent replacement is found. Mr. Smith is a retired AT&T executive.Mr. Johnson’s departure will leave PG&E without a permanent leader just as a new fire season begins in California. In addition, the company will soon have a completely new board of directors. As part of PG&E’s plan to exit bankruptcy, the company has acceded to a demand by Gov. Gavin Newsom that it replace all of its directors. The governor will also have the authority to veto any nomination to the board.Although Governor Newsom has no direct authority over PG&E’s bankruptcy, the Legislature gave him the power to decide if the company can participate in a $20 billion wildfire fund that will help pay for liabilities from fires started by utility equipment. Without access to that fund, PG&E might not be able to secure financing for its bankruptcy plan.The California Public Utilities Commission, which regulates PG&E’s electricity and gas businesses, declined to comment on Mr. Johnson’s departure. But a spokeswoman said commissioners would soon vote on a proposal to approve PG&E’s bankruptcy plan and require the company to make changes to its management and board in the interest of improving safety and accountability.