Fed Moves to Keep Credit Flowing and Money Markets Calm Amid Coronavirus Turmoil
By Jeanna SmialekWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve tried to insulate both Main Street and Wall Street from the coronavirus’s economic fallout on Monday, encouraging banks to work with affected customers while taking measures to keep money flowing smoothly between financial institutions.The Fed, together with other regulators, said on Monday afternoon that it “encouraged financial institutions to meet the financial needs of customers and members affected by the coronavirus.” Regulators added that “prudent efforts that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices should not be subject to examiner criticism” — suggesting that supervisors will be understanding if banks are flexible with customers who experience income disruptions or other virus-related issues.The announcement came hours after the Federal Reserve Bank of New York announced that it would ramp up the amount of short-term loans it offers banks, an attempt to keep cash flowing smoothly through the financial system.The Fed’s efforts to preserve normalcy have come as markets continued to plunge amid uncertainty about economic fallout from the virus. The infection has now sickened more than 110,000 people, and as it spreads through the United States and Europe, worries are mounting that growth will slow drastically. That, together with falling oil prices, has sent global markets into turmoil — Wall Street experienced its worst day in a decade on Monday.It is the central bank’s latest offensive to try to mitigate the coronavirus’s fallout. Policymakers had already cut interest rates by half a percentage point last week in an emergency move, lowering the Fed’s benchmark policy tool to a range of 1.0 to 1.25 percent. Chair Jerome H. Powell and his colleagues are trying to protect the U.S. economy before a slowdown — caused by worker quarantines, weaker tourism and swooning markets — fully takes hold.The central bank is also trying to make sure that markets themselves function properly. The New York Fed pledged to increase its daily offering of overnight repurchase agreements — essentially short-term loans to eligible banks — to at least $150 billion from $100 billion between Monday and Thursday. It is also increasing its offering of two-week loans starting tomorrow, to at least $45 billion from at least $20 billion.The moves “are intended to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures,” the New York Fed said in a statement.“They should help support smooth functioning of funding markets as market participants implement business resiliency plans in response to the coronavirus,” the statement said, though it added that the Fed would “continue to adjust” operations as needed.The Fed had already been active in the market for short-lived loans between banks and financial institutions — called the repurchase, or “repo,” market — for months, starting after rates in that obscure but important corner of the financial system’s plumbing spiked back in September. It had recently been shrinking the size of its injections as markets calmed.But demand at its regular repo operations surged as markets swung, fueling speculation by investors that the Fed might lift the size of its offerings.Officials have also been buying $60 billion in short-term Treasury bills each month to build up the financial system’s buffer of bank reserves, essentially deposits at the Fed. The goal was to keep cash flowing smoothly so that borrowing costs in money markets would stay under control.“We will ensure that the supply of reserves in the banking system remains ample,” John C. Williams, the New York Fed president, said in a speech last week. “We are monitoring conditions in money markets closely.”Many economists expect the Fed to do more to protect growth while keeping financial plumbing functioning normally.The Fed is widely expected to slash rates by another half point by March 18, the conclusion of its next meeting. Many investors anticipate that the Fed, which cut rates to near zero during the financial crisis, will return to that level by April.And when it comes to market functioning, “in our view much more will need to be forthcoming and very soon,” economists at Evercore ISI wrote in a note on Monday. They speculated that the central bank might extend its Treasury bill buying program, which would help to keep the financial system flush with cash and potentially help to avert short-term funding disruptions.The central bank could also activate so-called swap lines, the Evercore economists said. The Fed has a history of using its agreements with global partners to help foreign central banks deliver U.S. dollar funding to financial institutions in their regions amid market stress.The Fed has gotten creative in previous crises, using an alphabet soup of fixes in the depths of the financial meltdown. That could happen again. When investors became reluctant to lend during the financial crisis, the Fed auctioned 28-day loans, and later 84-day loans, to banks that were still in decent shape. The program, known as the Term Auction Facility, spanned the end of 2007 to mid-2010 and allowed the Fed to get money flowing among a broader range of financial market players.But such efforts will only mitigate damage. They cannot fix ruptured supply lines or send quarantined workers back to the office, nor can they stop the spread of a virus.