Pulitzer Prize: 2020 Winners List
By The New York TimesPUBLIC SERVICEThe Anchorage Daily News, in collaboration with the nonprofit outlet ProPublica, won the prestigious public service award for a yearlong investigation of sexual violence in Alaska. The series, led by the reporter Kyle Hopkins, uncovered a “two-tiered” criminal justice system in the state, in which rural communities, disproportionately populated by Indigenous people, had limited or no access to law enforcement and four times as many sex offenders as other areas in the United States, per capita.Finalists The New York Times; The Washington PostBREAKING NEWSThe staff of The Courier-Journal uncovered how last-minute pardons by Kentucky’s outgoing governor, Matt Bevin, were made unilaterally and violated legal norms. In one case, The Courier-Journal revealed political ties to a released prisoner: His family had contributed thousands to the governor’s campaign. The paper’s reporting led to an investigation by federal agencies.Finalists Staff of the Los Angeles Times; Staff of The Washington PostINVESTIGATIVE REPORTINGMr. Rosenthal, 31, received the award for a five-part series on how reckless loans, dispensed by a small group of taxi medallion owners, put thousands of immigrants in debt while bankers made huge profits. Mr. Rosenthal revealed that government officials allowed lenders with political connections to skirt certain regulations and chronicled the devastating impact the debt had on drivers, causing several to die by suicide. This reporting led to local, state and federal investigations.Finalists Jay Hancock and Elizabeth Lucas of Kaiser Health News; Staff of The Wall Street JournalEXPLANATORY REPORTINGIn its series “2°C: Beyond the Limit,” The Washington Post examined the disastrous effects of global warming, analyzing nearly 170 years of temperature data, creating interactive maps and other visualizations, and compiling dispatches from a dozen hot spots. The sweeping reporting, which included stories about outdoor air-conditioning in Qatar and fires in California, demonstrated how parts of the earth have already warmed by 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) — a threshold considered dangerous by policymakers worldwide.Finalists Rosanna Xia, Swetha Kannan and Terry Castleman of the Los Angeles Times; Staff of Reveal from the Center for Investigative ReportingLOCAL REPORTINGThe staff of The Baltimore Sun was honored for reporting that revealed that Mayor Catherine Pugh of Baltimore had no-bid contracts with the University of Maryland’s medical system to boost profits for her self-published children’s book. The reporting resulted in the mayor’s resignation and a February sentencing of three years in federal prison. The story began with a tip to Sun reporter Luke Broadwater asking him to look into contracts at the state’s hospital system. When he came across Ms. Pugh’s name on the list and hundreds of thousands of dollars for her books, he knew the story was bigger than he anticipated. “The whole newsroom activated and everyone saw right away that this is going to be a big story and let’s all roll,” Mr. Broadwater, 40, said in an interview.Finalists Peter Smith, Stephanie Strasburg and Shelly Bradbury of The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette; Staff of The Boston GlobeNATIONAL REPORTINGThe reporting team for ProPublica’s “Disaster in the Pacific” series spent 18 months investigating several deadly accidents involving the Navy and Marines in 2017 and 2018. While the military tried to block its reporting, the team used more than 13,000 pages of confidential records and interviews with hundreds of officials, exposing a trail of outdated equipment, insufficient training and warnings ignored by senior leadership.After 346 people died in two crashes involving Boeing’s 737 Max jet, The Seattle Times began reporting on the manufacturer’s many missteps leading to the accidents. In more than 150 stories, the reporting team described issues such as Boeing’s problematic flight control system and the flawed regulatory process that delegated safety responsibilities to the company and allowed management to take shortcuts and ignore warnings.Finalists Staff of The Wall Street JournalINTERNATIONAL REPORTINGState-sponsored assassination campaigns; arms dealers tied to mercenaries; a military intelligence group deploying hackers to destabilize elections. It’s not the plot of a spy novel; it’s President Vladimir Putin’s regime in Russia. The staff of The New York Times reported from Ukraine, Madagascar, Bulgaria, Libya and the Central African Republic, often at risk, to uncover the many layers behind Mr. Putin’s globe-spanning operations. The stories offered riveting accounts of the spycraft coming from the Kremlin.Finalists Staff of The New York Times; Staff of ReutersAUDIO REPORTINGThis American Life won the first Pulitzer Prize for audio journalism for an episode of “The Out Crowd.” The episode focuses on the impact of the Trump administration’s “Remain in Mexico” policy and how it affected asylum seekers that were awaiting help in Mexico. Molly O’Toole, an investigative reporter, interviewed asylum officers who enforced the policy at tent camps across the border. The episode also included reporting by Emily Green, who used recordings of cartels attempting to negotiate ransom for a father and son who had been kidnapped immediately after returning to Mexico.Finalists Andrew Beck Grace, Chip Brantley, Graham Smith, Nicole Beemsterboer and Robert Little of NPR; Nigel Poor, Earlonne Woods and Rahsaan Thomas for “Ear Hustle,” produced by inmates of San Quentin State Prison.FEATURE WRITINGMr. Taub, who joined The New Yorker as a staff writer in 2017, told the harrowing story of Mohamedou Salahi, an engineer who was accused of aiding Al Qaeda and spent 15 years at the United States detention camp in Guantánamo Bay. There, Salahi was tortured and interrogated, even as he maintained his innocence and insisted he did not hold extremist views. By turns compassionate and investigative, Mr. Taub entwined his exploration of Salahi’s plight with a broader examination of America’s yearslong war on terrorism.Finalists Chloé Cooper Jones, freelance reporter, The Verge; Ellen Barry of The New York Times; Nestor Ramos of The Boston GlobeCOMMENTARYMs. Hannah-Jones, ​a staff writer at The New York Times Magazine, ​mixed personal anecdote and history in her essay for the magazine’s “The 1619 Project,” which sought to re-center the contributions of African-Americans, including enslaved people, to American history​. The project​ ​became part of the culture war and a partisan football, with conservatives including Newt Gingrich attacking it as part of what he said was the newspaper’s campaign against President Trump. ​ ​Five history professors signed a letter criticizing the initiative as praiseworthy but flawed in some particulars​, homing in on a few points in Ms. Hannah-Jones’s essay​. In a rebuttal, Jake Silverstein, the magazine’s editor in chief, stood by the project.Finalists Sally Jenkins of The Washington Post; Steve Lopez of the Los Angeles TimesCRITICISMMr. Knight, who has been an art critic for the Los Angeles Times since 1989, was recognized for his critique of a proposal to overhaul the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. In heartfelt and rigorous columns opposing the plan, Mr. Knight invoked the paramount role of the museum in his city’s urban and cultural fabric. Mr. Knight has been a finalist for the criticism prize on three occasions, in 1991, 2001 and 2007.Finalists Justin Davidson of New York magazine; Soraya Nadia McDonald of The UndefeatedEDITORIAL WRITINGMr. Gerritt writes for The Herald-Press of Palestine, Tex., a town 100 miles southeast of Dallas. He was awarded for his series on deaths of pretrial inmates in jails. Of the death of one La Salle County prisoner in August 2017, a November editorial said, “An autopsy ruled Davis’ death ‘accidental,’ but like most of Texas’ annual 100-plus in-custody deaths, it stemmed from a lethal mix of negligence, incompetence, and indifference.”Finalists Jill Burcum of the Star Tribune, Minneapolis, Minn.; Melinda Henneberger of The Kansas City StarEDITORIAL CARTOONINGMr. Blitt’s unflattering caricatures of President Trump frequently grace The New Yorker’s covers. The judges said his cartoons skewered the Trump White House with a “deceptively sweet watercolor style.” Mr. Blitt has contributed cartoons to the pages of The New Yorker for more than 30 years. He now has a series in the online edition as well.Finalists Kevin Kallaugher, freelancer; Lalo Alcaraz, freelancer; Matt Bors of The NibBREAKING NEWS PHOTOGRAPHYThe photography staff of Reuters was cited for striking photographs of Hong Kong as citizens mounted mass protests against the encroachment of the Chinese government. The images of fire, tear gas and rubber bullets as riots broke out in the streets captured the escalating violence and turmoil of the clash.Finalists Dieu Nalio Chery and Rebecca Blackwell of Associated Press; Tom Fox of The Dallas Morning NewsFEATURE PHOTOGRAPHYThe three photographers were commended for capturing vivid images of conflict in Kashmir as India cracked down on the contested territory. The region’s residents were put under curfew and communications were blacked out. The photographers revealed the turmoil and plight of the Kashmiri people.Finalists Erin Clark of The Boston Globe; Mary F. Calvert, freelance photographerFICTIONWith this year’s Pulitzer Prize, Colson Whitehead becomes just the fourth fiction writer to win the prize twice (the others are Booth Tarkington, William Faulkner and John Updike). “The Nickel Boys” reimagines the real-life horrors at a reform school in 1960s Florida. “Two heavy books in a row flowed out of me,” Mr. Whitehead, 50, said on Monday. (He won for “The Underground Railroad” in 2017.) “And I was relieved to be done talking about them, actually, because they took so much energy out of me. The next book I’m working on has more jokes in it, and it does feel like those two books seem sort of remote now.”Finalists “The Dutch House,” by Ann Patchett; “The Topeka School,” by Ben LernerDRAMAMr. Jackson, 39, is a gay, black, musical-theater writer who wrote a musical about a gay, black, musical-theater writer writing a musical about a gay, black, musical-theater writer. “I was trying to speak about what it means to be a self in general, and a black and queer self in particular — just expressing the joys and sorrows of the experience of being in this particular body,” Mr. Jackson said in an interview. The musical is as zany as it sounds — daring and self-lacerating, outrageous and moving. The Times described it as “a self-portrait in an endless hall of mirrors” and called it “jubilantly anguished.” The show was produced Off Broadway last year by Playwrights Horizons in association with Page 73.Finalists “Heroes of the Fourth Turning,” by Will Arbery; “Soft Power,” by David Henry Hwang and Jeanine Tesori.HISTORYHenrietta Wood was born into slavery, legally freed in 1848, then abducted and sold back into bondage in 1858. She later sued her kidnapper and was awarded $2,500 — the most ever awarded by an American court as restitution for slavery. The prize jury cited Mr. McDaniel, 40, an associate professor at Rice University, for “a masterfully researched meditation on reparations.”Finalists “Race for Profit: How Banks and the Real Estate Industry Undermined Black Homeownership,” by Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor; “The End of the Myth: From the Frontier to the Border Wall in the Mind of America,” by Greg GrandinbiographyMr. Moser, 43, was cited for “an authoritatively constructed work” capturing Susan Sontag’s “genius and humanity alongside her addictions, sexual ambiguities and volatile enthusiasms.” To research the book, he interviewed nearly 600 friends, enemies, relatives, editors, lovers and others to capture an intellectual who shaped our thinking about everything from art to war to disease. “I hope her legacy won’t be seen as a historical curiosity, but as something vital and ongoing,” he said.Finalists “Our Man: Richard Holbrooke and the End of the American Century,” by George Packer; “Parisian Lives: Samuel Beckett, Simone de Beauvoir, and Me,” by Deirdre BairpoetryJericho Brown spoke on Monday of being “overtaken and overwhelmed by” the process of writing his third collection. “This book wouldn’t leave me alone,” he said. “I was writing poems in elevators. I had to pull my car over to write poems. It was the most exhilarating and exhausting thing.” The book covers subjects from the Trojan War to James Baldwin to, perhaps most centrally, the often unpunished violence that police commit against African-Americans. “The recognition feels good,” Mr. Brown, 44, said. “But I still have work to do. I want to continue being subversive, asking hard questions and answering them through poems.”Finalists “Dunce,” by Mary Ruefle; “Only as the Day Is Long: New and Selected Poems,” by Dorianne LauxGENERAL NONFICTIONAt the time of her diagnosis with an aggressive form of breast cancer, the poet Anne Boyer was 41 and a single parent. In her genre-defying memoir, Ms. Boyer, now 46, chronicles her struggle to survive not just the disease, but a brutal chemotherapy regime. “To submit to it, I thought, was to feel like dying but possibly to live,” she writes. The book, which drew comparisons to Susan Sontag’s “Illness as Metaphor,” was called “extraordinary and furious” by The New York Times.Ms. Boyer shared the award for general nonfiction with the historian Greg Grandin, 57, whose book about the American frontier explores the myth of American exceptionalism. Mr. Grandin traces the country’s fervent belief in endless outward expansion and how it gave way to nationalism, racism and partisan polarization, epitomized by the current political battle over immigration and the border wall.Finalists “Elderhood: Redefining Aging, Transforming Medicine, Reimagining Life," by Louise Aronson; “Solitary,” by Albert Woodfox with Leslie GeorgeMUSICIn this impassioned, jazz-infused opera, Mr. Davis, 69, and the librettist Richard Wesley tell the story of the black teenagers wrongfully convicted of the brutal 1989 assault of a white woman in New York. The Pulitzer board praised the work, which premiered in June at Long Beach Opera, for its “powerful vocal writing and sensitive orchestration.” In an interview before the premiere, Mr. Davis said, “I want people to experience the opera so they identify with them, so they think they’re one of the five.”Finalists “and all the days were purple” by Alex Weiser; “Sky: Concerto for Violin” by Michael TorkeSPECIAL CITATION