Coronavirus Shuts Macau, the World’s Gambling Capital
By Alexandra StevensonIt’s like closing the Las Vegas Strip, six times over.Officials in the Chinese city of Macau on Tuesday asked its 41 casinos to close for half a month as they rush to stop the coronavirus outbreak afflicting China and the region. The move will shut down the world’s gambling capital, which could hit big American casino operators like Wynn Resorts and Las Vegas Sands as well as the local companies that sustain the territory’s economy.The authorities said 10 people in Macau had been sickened by the pneumonialike illness, among them a hotel employee at Galaxy Casino, one of the city’s busiest gambling establishments. Though no deaths have been reported there, the coronavirus is known to have killed at least 490 people in mainland China, one in the Philippines and one in Hong Kong, Macau’s neighbor.“Of course this was a difficult decision, but we must do it for the health of Macau’s residents,” said Ho Iat Seng, the chief executive of the semiautonomous Chinese territory, in a televised news conference.Wearing a blue face mask and a suit, Mr. Ho said the case of the hotel worker served as a warning that the virus was beginning to spread through the city. The worker had shared shuttle buses and the casino cafeteria with colleagues.Gambling accounts for four-fifths of the Macau government’s revenue. But Mr. Ho said, “Macau can still bear these economic losses.”transcriptThis is Wuhan, the city that officials say is the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. We reached residents inside Wuhan, who have been cut off from the outside world for days, to find out how they are coping. They’re wearing masks to conceal part of their identities for fear of persecution for speaking out. A patient, who spoke to us by audio, told us about his struggle to receive treatment. Mr. Liu recovered at home, and is feeling better now. Some blame the government for mismanaging the situation … … but they remain hopeful as citizens step up to help.The coronavirus has shaken companies and investors around the world who have come to rely on China for its efficient factories, its increasingly affluent consumers and its years of hard-charging economic growth. General Motors, Ford, Nissan and other auto companies have temporarily closed factories. Apple and Starbucks have closed stores.[Read: How to survive an outbreak.]On Tuesday, Cathay Pacific, Hong Kong’s biggest local airline, announced steep cuts to China flights and plans to pare back across its network, and American Airlines suspended all flights to Hong Kong from Dallas-Fort Worth and Los Angeles through Feb. 20, citing low demand.Most of China remains shut down by the coronavirus, which first emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan and has sickened thousands of people in the country. The global economic outlook, the fortunes of major companies and the jobs of workers around the world could depend on how quickly they come back.Macau makes a glittery and sometimes gaudy symbol of the world’s dependence on Chinese money. A former Portuguese colony that was returned to Chinese control in 1999, Macau is the only part of China that allows casino gambling.As deep-pocketed Chinese tourists arrived in droves, Macau transformed into a thriving international and hub for entertainment, fine dining and luxury shopping. Gambling companies have built vast casinos, illuminating the skyline of the once sleepy city of just over 622,000 people with neon and spotlights. It offers everything that Las Vegas has — like a miniature Eiffel Tower — and more, like a gilded-dragon cable car that floats past dancing water fountains at the Wynn Palace.Macau was bustling just two weeks ago as tourists from the mainland arrived to spend the Lunar New Year holiday at the city’s baccarat tables and Michelin-starred restaurants.“There were no signs of the epidemic anywhere,” said Wang Qian, who traveled with her parents to shop and see the sights.When they visited the Casino Lisboa on Jan. 21, employees took their temperatures. Still, when they left three days later, “I don’t think people took it seriously yet, but many started to wear face masks,” she said.Macau also suspended basic public services on Tuesday, and Mr. Ho urged residents not to leave their homes except to get food. “This is not a holiday,” he said.“It’s just mind-boggling. I’ve never seen anything like this in my 25 years here.” said Carlos Lobo, a lawyer and gambling consultant in Macau.“This shows two things: the seriousness of the situation and the extreme measure that the government is taking to control the outbreak,” Mr. Lobo said.Macau’s gross gaming revenue totaled $36.5 billion last year, a 3.4 percent drop from the year before but still about six times that of the Las Vegas Strip. In more recent years, the biggest American casino operators, like Wynn Resorts and Las Vegas Sands, have come to rely on their towering outposts in Macau.The impact will be “devastating” in the short term, said Matthew Ossolinski, a gambling consultant and investor. He estimated that the two-week closure could shave 5 to 15 percent off Macau’s gaming revenue this year.Sands, founded by the American billionaire Sheldon Adelson, a major Republican donor, owns several casinos and hotels in Macau, including the Venetian Macao, the Parisian Macao and Sands Macao. Wynn Resorts, until recently run by the casino mogul Steve Wynn, owns three properties in Macau.A Wynn Resorts spokesman , Michael Weaver, said the company supported the government’s decision to close casinos in Macau.“Our greatest concern and our top priority is the health and safety of our employees, their families and the citizens of Macau,” Mr. Weaver said. “We believe that our goals and the goals of the Macau government during this challenging period are fully aligned.”Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.In a statement, a spokesman for Sands, Ron Reese, said that the “health and safety of our team members and guests remains our number one priority.”Mr. Ossolinski, the gambling consultant, said he expected the industry to bounce back once casinos opened again and Chinese tourists were allowed to travel to the city.“Macau remains the golden goose,” he said. But when things pick up would be “harder to predict.”In late January, the Chinese authorities began to take drastic measures to contain the outbreak. The shift coincided with Lunar New Year, the most lucrative time for Macau casinos, and the city has already seen visits drop by 80 percent, according to Fitch Ratings.For weeks, many casino floors, typically brimming with Chinese tourists, have been largely empty. Recent visitors described empty casino floors, worse than when China clamped down on the casinos to stop corruption by government officials.Mr. Lobo, the consultant, who has lived in Macau for 25 years and has worked for the Macau government and the Venetian, visited some of the biggest casinos in Macau on Monday.“I was like, ‘Whoa, this is big,’” he said. “It’s like a ghost town in terms of patrons. It was surreal.”