Rich Profits and Dark Messages From the Market (No, Not That Market)
Bond investors have been reaping big rewards in a market that is reminding us we never fully emerged from the last financial crisis.By Jeff SommerThe news is gloomy for stock investors. Shares have been plummeting as traders absorb the latest information about the coronavirus’s spread around the world.Most commodity markets have been miserable too, with the prices of oil, gas, coal and copper falling relentlessly.But if you focus on the bond market — which doesn’t dominate the headlines but is much bigger than the global stock market — you will get a different and more complex picture. And if you own bonds, they have probably been growing rapidly in value.The reasons for these paper profits are disconcerting. The bond market isn’t merely reacting to the coronavirus: It is reflecting a perception that the global economy was vulnerable long before the disease emerged, because financial markets have never fully recovered from the last financial crisis.David Rosenberg has been tracking the bond market for decades. He is now the chief economist of his own firm, Rosenberg Research. Until 2009, he was chief North American economist for Merrill Lynch, and he takes a very long view. “If you had told me a decade ago that bond yields would be this low now, it would have been shocking,” he said.“Basically,” he added, “interest rates have never returned to where they were before the last recession. They’ve kept dropping. We’ve been in a long secular bull market for bonds, and it’s not over yet, not by a long shot. Rates are going lower.”I think he’s probably right. Which means that it’s likely you can make more money in bonds, even at this late stage of a decades-long rally.But it also means that we are living in a strange new world, one in which financial markets are being stretched in ways that scarcely could have been comprehended a decade ago.The headlines have focused on the cascading losses in the stock market over the last week or so. But that’s not been the case for bonds.To the contrary, it has been a time to reap astounding profits from bond holdings. And for buy-and-hold investors who have kept both stocks and bonds, it has been a reminder that those boring bonds can offset painful stock losses, making it easier to hang on for the long run.Consider these numbers:Through Thursday, a fund that tracked the investment-grade long-term U.S. bond market — the Vanguard Long-Term Bond ETF — generated a 7.5 percent return so far this year. But in the same stretch, a fund that tracked the S&P 500 stock index — the SPDR S&P 500 ETF, or SPY — fell 7.6 percent, according to Morningstar.Long-term bonds have also outstripped stocks over the last 12 months. In that period, the stock fund returned 7.5 percent, but the long-term bond fund gained more than 26 percent, a staggering return for an asset category often thought of as dull.Bond prices have risen sky-high because they move in the opposite direction of interest rates. And rates for the benchmark 10-year Treasury note have dropped to levels that have never been seen before. On Friday morning, for example, the rate for the 10-year note dropped as low as 1.15 percent. Mr. Rosenberg expects that it will fall even further.The bond market has been conveying truly disturbing messages, not just about the current state of the economy but about the world’s inability to recover entirely from the last recession and our vulnerability when the next one comes.Recall the downturn set off more than a decade ago by the global financial crisis. That recession started in the United States in December 2007 and ended in June 2009, according to the official arbiters at the National Bureau of Economic Research.The ensuing economic recovery has been the longest in American history, yet it has been one of the feeblest as well. One indication of that can be seen in the bond market right now. Interest rates typically fall when the economy is weak but then rise, along with inflation, in periods of rip-roaring growth. But that is not the pattern we’ve seen over the last 10 years.Both the short-term rates controlled by the Federal Reserve and the longer-term rates determined by the bond market did drop sharply, during and after the last financial crisis. But since then, inflation has remained low, the rate of economic growth has been modest and interest rates have never returned even close to their prerecession levels.The 10-year Treasury note in 2007 was as high as 4.85 percent, Treasury data shows. It hasn’t been much above 3 percent in the last five years. And the federal funds rate, the short-term interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, reached 5.25 percent in 2006. It rose to only 2.5 percent in 2018 and 2019, and now is in the 1.5 to 1.75 percent range, according to the Fed.Updated May 26, 2020If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The United States has entered dangerous territory, a paper published last month by the Federal Reserve emphasized. The paper, written by the Fed economist Michael Kiley, says that the current low level of rates will cause severe policy dilemmas when the next recession actually hits.Historically, interest rates tend to decline significantly during recessions and for two years afterward, Mr. Kiley wrote. But with rates as low as they are now, he said, “simple arithmetic” shows that in a recession, both short-term interest rates and those for bonds will approach zero — or even be negative. That, he says, will bring the “U.S. experience closer to that seen in Europe and Japan,” where many long-term bonds are already paying negative interest.As I wrote several years ago, this amounts to the kind of proposition expected from gangsters: Hand me your money, watch me skim off some of it and you get what’s left later. Yet it’s become commonplace in the global bond market.That might not happen in the United States, Mr. Rosenberg said, because of “legal and logistical constraints.”“Negative rates are a tax on money,” he said, “and it’s one thing to have them in Japan and Germany, but something else entirely when you’re talking about the world’s reserve currency, the dollar.”Essentially, with negative rates, people would be paying money for the privilege of sheltering their funds in the United States bond market. Could that happen? We may soon find out, as interest rates drop during the coronavirus crisis, which appears to be sapping economic growth around the world.